International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education (2023) 33:325–383
https://doi.org/10.1007/s40593-022-00298-y
ARTICLE

AI + Ethics Curricula for Middle School Youth: Lessons
Learned from Three Project‑Based Curricula
Randi Williams1 · Safinah Ali1 · Nisha Devasia1 · Daniella DiPaola1 ·
Jenna Hong1 · Stephen P. Kaputsos1 · Brian Jordan1 · Cynthia Breazeal1
Accepted: 14 June 2022 / Published online: 1 August 2022
© The Author(s) 2022

Abstract
Artificial Intelligence (AI) is revolutionizing many industries and becoming increasingly ubiquitous in everyday life. To empower children growing up with AI to navigate society’s evolving sociotechnical context, we developed three middle school
AI literacy curricula: Creative AI, Dancing with AI, and How to Train Your Robot.
In this paper we discuss how we leveraged three design principles—active learning, embedded ethics, and low barriers to access – to effectively engage students in
learning to create and critique AI artifacts. During the summer of 2020, we recruited
and trained in-service, middle school teachers from across the United States to coinstruct online workshops with students from their schools. In the workshops, a
combination of hands-on unplugged and programming activities facilitated students’
understanding of AI. As students explored technical concepts in tandem with ethical
ones, they developed a critical lens to better grasp how AI systems work and how
they impact society. We sought to meet the specified needs of students from a range
of backgrounds by minimizing the prerequisite knowledge and technology resources
students needed to participate. Finally, we conclude with lessons learned and design
recommendations for future AI curricula, especially for K-12 in-person and virtual
learning.
Keywords Artificial Intelligence (AI) · AI Literacy · Curriculum · Middle-school ·
Online Learning · Constructionism

Introduction
Artificial Intelligence (AI) is the study of how humans construct machines to embody
mechanisms of thought and intelligent behavior (AAAI, 2020). From social media apps
to education tools to interactive voice agents, AI is becoming an increasingly prominent
* Randi Williams
randiw12@mit.edu
1

MIT Media Lab, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA

13

Vol.:(0123456789)

326

International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education (2023) 33:325–383

part of everyday life. However, members of the general public are often unaware that they
are interacting with algorithms which might infringe on their privacy or contain harmful biases toward or against different demographic groups. Societal obliviousness together
with technological opaqueness present serious concerns about people’s ability to safely
and critically consume, use, and collaborate with AI (Long & Magerko, 2020). Traditional computer science, programming, and digital literacy skills will not be enough to
successfully navigate society’s evolving socio-technical context (Touretzky et al., 2019b).
Students growing up in the era of AI must be equipped with the knowledge and skills to
participate in the creation and critique of AI artifacts (DiPaola et al., 2020).
The movement to teach artificial intelligence K-12 to students, which has roots in the
beginning of the artificial intelligence movement (Solomon et al., 2020), has surged in
recent years. Over the past five years, multiple AI literacy platforms and lesson plans
have been developed for K-12 students (Long & Magerko, 2020; Touretzky et al., 2019b).
Touretzky et al. (2019a) outlined recent efforts to teach AI to K-12 students, covering curricula that encompass a wide range of AI topics such as knowledge systems, supervised
machine learning (ML), and AI ethics. Our three curricula featured AI concepts and technologies that have recently become more accessible to the public such as generative adversarial networks (GANs), affective perception, and autonomous robotics. In Creative AI,
we have students learn about various forms of AI-generated media and encourage them
to consider the societal implications of GANs such as the creation of deepfakes, and how
misinformation can spread through social networks that students use (Ali et al., 2021a;
DiPaola et al., 2021). In Dancing with AI, we introduced a suite of AI-powered blockbased coding tools (Jordan et al., 2021) and learning modules in which students design,
build, and reflect on interactive, movement-based, multimedia experiences. Finally, in
How to Train Your Robot, we integrated a low-cost Bluetooth robot into machine learning lessons to allow students to build AI projects motivated by doing social good, such as
helping someone in their community (Williams et al., 2021).
Our curricula are designed to incorporate active learning through hands-on activities,
projects, embed ethics and critical reflection about societal implications into all lessons,
and to lower barriers like access to resources for students and teachers. We focused on constructionist, project-based-learning and designed our workshops to fit into the school day.
However, due to the restrictions caused by the COVID-19 health emergency, we translated
our curricula from an in-person classroom format to a synchronous, online workshop. In
the summer of 2020, we trained 11 middle school teachers (primarily from Title 1 schools)
to co-teach workshops that served 78 students from 8 states across the USA. In this paper,
we describe the theoretical grounding, design, deployment, learning gains, and curriculum
assessment that we employed during our summer virtual workshops. We used a mixed
methods approach to evaluate our three curricula and associated webtools, materials, and
practices. Our work was guided by the following research questions:
1. What knowledge and perceptions of AI do middle school students have before
they begin our workshops?
2. What kinds of understanding about AI do students demonstrate after engaging
in our lessons, interactive activities, and tools? What student-driven projects did
our curricula enable?

13

International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education (2023) 33:325–383

327

We conclude with recommendations for future AI curricula that seek to broaden
access to K-12 AI education.

Background
K‑12 AI Literacy
As applications of artificial intelligence become more common in the lives of children, it
has become increasingly important to educate students about how AI technologies work
and how they impact society. It is projected that by 2025, about half of all work tasks will
be completed by automated systems (Leopold et al., 2018; U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2019). Students must be equipped with the skills to build and work with AI to meet
the needs of a shifting workforce. This means not only teaching students about what AI is,
but also enabling them to create with it, think critically about its impacts, and advocate for
responsible use (Ali et al., 2019; Zimmerman, 2018).
In recent years, researchers, educators, and technologists have come together
to define what it means for K-12 students to be AI literate, drawing on inspiration
from AI education at the collegiate level as well as K-12 computer science education (Kandlhofer et al., 2019; Lao, 2020; Long & Magerko, 2020; Touretzky et al.,
2019b; Zimmerman, 2018; De La Higuera, 2019). The AI4K12 initiative, a collaborative effort between the Computer Science Teachers Association (CSTA) and Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (AAAI), was formalized in
2018 and defined the “Five Big Ideas of AI” that K-12 students must know. These
are Perception, Representation and Reasoning, Learning, Natural Interaction, and
Societal Impact. As academic interest in AI literacy for K-12 has increased globally,
so has the number of available resources for K-12 AI education. For instance, the
AI4K12 effort has created a website for educators, developers, and the general public to access the growing number of resources (www.​ai4k12.​org). Similarly, the MIT
RAISE website (raise.mit.edu) highlights a wide range of K-12 AI literacy resources
and curricula developed at MIT and the larger K-12 AI education community. Even
the International Society for Technology in Education (ISTE) dedicated a section of
its website1 to classroom AI resources, notably its hands-on AI activity guides that
are available in different languages.
Strategies for K‑12 AI Education
Hands-on activities including unplugged simulations, programming activities,
and tangible learning tools are prominent in many K-12 AI education resources.
Unplugged activities have been used in computer science curricula to make computational ideas accessible without computers (Bell et al., 2009). For AI education, unplugged activities are powerful ways to have students explore the details of

1

Artificial Intelligence in Education, https://​www.​iste.​org/​areas-​of-​focus/​AI-​in-​educa​tion

13

328

International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education (2023) 33:325–383

algorithms even if they do not have the background knowledge or the resources to
actually program the algorithm (Ali et al., 2021a; Lee et al., 2021; Payne, 2020;
TechGirlz, 2018). The “Human Neural Network” activity (TechGirlz, 2018) and
“Contour to Classification Game” (Lee et al., 2021) delve into the finer details of
machine learning algorithms without getting into the calculus that makes the algorithms work. These two papers are exemplary of how unplugged activities can make
complex ideas in AI more digestible for younger learners.
Existing curricula and workshops often leverage novice-friendly coding tools to
give students the opportunity to become designers of their own AI systems.
Tools like the Personal Audio Classifier and Personal Image Classifier
from MIT App Inventor (Tang, 2019), Google’s Teachable Machine (Carney
et al., 2020), and PlushPal (Tseng et al., 2021) allow students and educators
to train, test, and export machine learning models using just their laptops and
web browsers. Other tools, such as Google’s Slice of ML,2 Machine Learning for Kids (ML4Kids),3 and AlpacaML (Zimmermann-Niefield et al., 2019)
allow students to build machine learning algorithms and get a glimpse into the
black box. Several tools integrate machine learning model creation into blockbased programming environments that many students are already familiar
with. ML4Kids, Cognimates (Druga, 2018), PoseBlocks (Jordan et al., 2021),
LearningML (García et al., 2020), and the Scratch Text Classifier (Reddy et al.,
2021) are AI-integrated extensions for the open source, block-based programming language Scratch (Resnick et al., 2009). Similarly, AI Programming for
eCraft2Learn4 is an extension of the drag-and-drop programming language
Snap! (Harvey et al., 2013). Other tools utilize the generative aspects of AI
such as GANs to allow students to creatively express themselves, such as GANimals (Boulais et al., 2020), GANPaint (Bau et al., 2019), MagicDraw (Ali
et al., 2020), and pix2pix (Isola et al., 2017).
Finally, building on work in mathematics education research, physical manipulatives have been used in AI education to make ideas more accessible and concrete
to students (National Council of Supervisors of Mathematics, 2013; Papert, 1980).
Scratch Nodes (Hitron et al., 2018) and PlushPal (Tseng et al., 2021) use physical
artifacts as a part of their machine learning courses to entice younger learners. At the
university level, professors have seen the benefits of using robots in their AI courses
to give physical meaning to the algorithms that they discuss in class (Kumar, 2004).
However, robots may disrupt the learning process as they do not always work reliably and may consume precious class time while students assemble and debug their
bots. Therefore, it is important that educators find a balance between learning about
AI and assembling robot kits (Koski et al., 2008; Talaga & Oh, 2009). Similar benefits and challenges with using robots to teach AI exist at the K-12 level (Touretzky
& Gardner-McCune, 2018; Williams et al., 2019).

2

Slice of ML by Google, https://​slice​ofml.​withg​oogle.​com/
Machine Learning 4 Kids by Dale Lane, https://​machi​nelea​rning​forki​ds.​co.​uk/
4
ECraft2Learn Project by Ken Kahn, https://​ecraf​t2lea​rn.​github.​io/​ai/
3

13

International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education (2023) 33:325–383

329

Opportunities for K‑12 AI Education
Existing resources for K-12 AI education are generally short, informal learning opportunities that focus on a particular concept or big idea in AI. However, as De la Higuera (2019) argues, schools should make time to teach AI in
their classrooms given the relevance of AI in children’s lives. This paper details
our steps toward making curricula that are practical for classroom by centering student and teacher needs in our design. There are few published pieces
on preparing in-service teachers to bring AI education to their classrooms. In
one of the most notable examples, Vazhayil et al. (2019) trained 24 secondary
school teachers (for students ages 14 to 18) to teach a project-based AI curriculum based on ML4Kids (Vazhayil et al., 2019). The research uncovered potential barriers for broader adoption of such a curriculum, including making tools
that are suitable for classrooms with different technological needs, considering
the pedagogical strategies used to deliver content, and ensuring that teachers
had the knowledge and resources they needed to support their students as they
learned. We designed our curricula to address these issues.
The ubiquity of machine learning algorithms makes them a relatable target for students growing up in this AI-infused age, hence most educational
resources teach the basics of supervised machine learning (Marques et al.,
2020). More recently, K-12 curricula developed by academic researchers are
moving beyond machine learning and teaching more cutting-edge AI topics to
students. For instance, generative ML, or AI that can generate new media, is a
recent innovation in the field of AI. One of the most common algorithms used
for generative ML is called generative adversarial networks, or GANs (Goodfellow, et al., 2014). While GANs can serve as a tool for enhancing creativity in children (Ali et al., 2020), they can also be used to generate fake media
that is meant to deceive others (Nguyen et al., 2019). Generative AI tools have
been used to create deepfake photos and videos that circulate on popular social
media websites such as Twitter, Facebook, and Instagram. Students begin to
be exposed to AI generated media in middle school, as they make their first
social media accounts. Unfortunately, to our knowledge, there are few other
published curricula on teaching K-12 students about generative ML. They are
being taught in a handful of college level courses, such as Machine Learning
for Artists,5 Computer Visions6; Artists and Machine Intelligence,7 and Creative Machine Learning for Design.8 However, college courses are not accessible
to the general public because they require a baseline knowledge of programming and costly computing resources. One of our curricula, Creative AI, tackles the topic of generative ML because of its relevance to students yet absence
in other K-12 resources.
5

Machine Learning for Artists by Gene Kogan, https://​ml4a.​github.​io/
Computer Visions: Generative Machine Learning Tools for Creative Applications course at MIT,
http://​visio​ns.​media.​mit.​edu/
7
Artists and Machine Intelligence by Google, https://​ami.​withg​oogle.​com/
8
Creative Machine Learning for Design course at MIT, https://​archi​tectu​re.​mit.​edu/​subje​ct/​spring-​2020-​
4453
6

13

330

International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education (2023) 33:325–383

Collegiate AI courses have historically overlooked ethics, separating it from
other lessons or isolating it in a separate course altogether (Fiesler et al., 2020).
That is beginning to change as researchers such as those associated with MIT’s
Schwarzman College of Computing have created case studies for engineering students to explore ethics. At the K-12 level, ethics at the center of AI4K12’s big
ideas in AI. The centrality of ethics is critical as AI systems have historically been
biased against marginalized groups such as women, people of African, Asian, and
Latin descent, Indigenous peoples, and low-income individuals and communities
(Buolamwini & Gebru, 2018; Eubanks, 2018; Noble, 2018; O’Neil, 2016). Skirpan et al. (2018) found that when students learn ethics throughout a computer science course, they think more holistically about the implications of the technology
that they are building than if ethics is taught at the end of a course or in a different
course all together. At the K-12 level, few papers discuss ethics with students and
those that do focus on the legal and social implications of deployed or hypothetical systems (Lassnig, 2018; Opel et al., 2019). The Middle School AI + Ethics Curriculum is an exception to this rule; it adapts the approach of collegiate courses
that embed ethics in technical lessons to develop students’ ethical design skills
(DiPaola et al., 2020; Payne, 2020). Doing so enabled middle school students to
apply ethical decision making to their AI projects and was highly engaging for
the students (DiPaola et al., 2020). We build on the work of the Middle School
AI + Ethics Curriculum and prioritize embedding ethics in our curricula.
Prior Literature on These Curricula
This paper builds upon prior works published about all three curricula. Ali et al.
(2021a) and DiPaola et al. (2021) did deep dives into Creative AI’s “How GANs
Work” and “Exploring GANs” activities, respectively.
Ali et al. (2021b) built on those papers to describe how students’ new
understandings of generative ML supported their ability to make policy
decisions. We reference results from these three papers to make our case
for the design principles we used to create the Creative AI curriculum. Lee
et al. (2021) described the DAILy curriculum, which contains some of the
same activities as the Creative AI curriculum but used formative assessments to measure changes in students ‘ understanding of AI. Jordan et al.
(2021) presented the technical implementation of the PoseBlocks platform
that undergirds the Dancing with AI curriculum. That paper analyzed student and teacher feedback after using the tool while here we describe our
design motivations for the tool and its accompanying activities. Similarly,
Reddy et al. (2021) detailed the technical implementation of the text classifier we use in the How to Train Your Robot curriculum and Williams et al.
(2021) analyzed teacher feedback on two iterations of How to Train Your
Robot. Compared to those prior works, this paper offers further analysis of
students’ performance on activities, the design of the curricula through the
lens of design principles, and discussion on the three curricula in conversation with one another.

13

International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education (2023) 33:325–383

331

Overview of Curricular Designs
Design Principles
All three of our curricula incorporated three key design principles: 1) active learning, 2) embedded ethics, and 3) low barriers to access. We used these principles to
inform the pedagogical strategies for the learning objectives, activities, assessments,
and tools of each curriculum as applied to their respective AI topics.
Active Learning
Active Learning, the first key design principle, is an instructional method
in which students play a key role in their learning by engaging in activities
then processing information through reflection (Bonwell & Eison, 1991;
Michael & Modell, 2003). Rather than passively engaging with material
through teacher lectures, students drive the learning process. Research
shows that active learning leads to higher information retention, more profound absorption of ideas, and more positive attitudes toward the subject—
especially in the sciences (Michael, 2006; Prince, 2005). Furthermore,
active learning builds on prior knowledge making it an appropriate instructional strategy for students who are new to a field of study (McConnell,
1996; Michael & Modell, 2003). Most middle school students lack the
mathematical and computational background to understand AI as it is traditionally taught in undergraduate classrooms. With active learning, students
can synthesize an evidence-based understanding of algorithms by personally encountering new ideas through construction and discovery (Bruner,
1961; Fortus, 2004; Papert, 1980).
In our virtual workshops, students engaged in active learning through
hands-on activities, often discovery activities done in small groups, and then
refined their understanding with questions and group discussion (Bruner, 1961;
Michael & Modell, 2003). Activities included demos of existing AI systems,
simulations that allowed students to function as different components of an
algorithm, and group discussions about how humans and computers accomplish
cognitive tasks. We also engaged students in active learning by designing and
constructing artifacts (Fortus, 2004; Kafai, 1995; Kolodner et al., 2003; Papert, 1980). All three curricula ended in a final project and presentation, which
enabled students to apply what they learned to a personally meaningful project
that they could critique, reflect upon, and share with others. Examples of active
learning activities from each curriculum are featured in the first row of Table 1.
Embedded Ethics
The second principle, embedded ethics, refers to the pedagogical practice of teaching technical and ethical concepts in tandem (Payne, 2020; Saltz et al., 2019).

13

13

As part of the “Exploring GANs” activity,
students play with various GAN demos
then discuss potentialt positive and negative
impactsof the tools

Embedded Ethics

Low Barriers to Access GANs typically require a lot of computing
power to create
The “GAN Play” and “Text Generation” tools
used pre-trained models to allow students to
run models on a web browser and quickly
create text and image artifacts

In the “How GANs Work” activity, students
embodied the roles of a generator and a discriminator in a game about the relationship
between the two neural networks

Active Learning

Creative AI

How to Train your Robot

All students completed and presented ethical
matrices for their final projects. In the matrices, students identified the key stakeholders
and potential good and bad consequences of
deploying their projects

PoseBlocks are designed to be web-first and to There is no programming pre-requisite for the
curriculum. The first programming activity
do real-time affective and image recognition
uses a set of mini challenges to get students
in a web browser. Additional care was taken
up to speed on the important robotics and
to ensure that students could use PoseBlocks
programming concepts they will need later in
even if they did not have a dedicated GPU,
the class
camera, or microphone on their devices

As students learn about how image classification works in the “Examples of Classification in AI” activity, they reflect on real
world implications of algorithms trained
with flaws in their datasets

In the introduction to “Image Classification”
In the “Charades” activity, students learned
about feature selection. In a game, they prac- activity, students experimented with the
Quick Draw game and dataset to see how
ticed identifying, describing, and physically
different features of images contribute to how
acting out salient features of movements to
algorithms learn to distinguish classes
design movement classifiers

Dancing with AI

Table 1  Examples of how the design principles (active learning, embedded ethics, and low barriers to access) were applied to our Creative AI, Dancing with AI, and How
to Train your Robot curricula

332
International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education (2023) 33:325–383

International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education (2023) 33:325–383

333

Ethics is a key learning objective included in K-12 AI frameworks as Big Idea #5 in
Touretzky et al. (2019a, b) and Competency #16 in Long and Magerko (2020).
The benefits of embedding ethics into technical lessons include students developing a better understanding of how technology interacts with society and increased
engagement (Payne, 2020; Saltz et al., 2019). Practices for embedding ethics include
using real world examples to contextualize lessons, critiquing AI systems, and using
stakeholder analysis to inform system design (Payne, 2020; Register & Ko, 2020;
Saltz et al., 2019; Shen et al., 2021). Where some middle school subjects may struggle to demonstrate the relevance of the material to students’ lives, AI ethics confronts students with developing, real-world issues that impact their lives every day.
Furthermore, inviting students to bring their ideas into the classroom, and to hear
about the perspectives and experiences of others, helps them develop human skills
like empathy and critical thinking (Payne, 2020).
Each of our curricula focused on two key ideas in technology ethics: 1) viewing technology as a sociotechnical system (Winner, 1980) and 2) critiquing the ethical implications of specific technologies (i.e., GANs, facial recognition). We taught
ethical concepts through experimentation, discussion, and real-world examples.
For example, in the “Exploring Word Analogies” activity in the How to Train Your
Robot curriculum, students use a visualization tool to explore gender, age, class,
and other biases that exist in word embeddings. Many of the concepts that students
engaged with are ongoing discussions in the field of AI. The irresoluteness of these
topics encouraged students to embrace ambiguity and recognize the importance
of making their voices heard. Discussions between students encouraged perspective taking and allowed students to debate points made by their peers. Additional
instances of activities which emphasized embedded ethics are shown in the second
row of Table 1.
Low Barriers to Access
Our third design principle, low barriers to access, involves centering student and
teacher needs in our design as we strive toward the larger goal of reaching all students with AI education. To address the barrier of engagement, we incorporated
AI with subjects like art, dancing, and robotics (e.g., the Dancing with AI curriculum used dancing as an opportunity to engage students in physical movement and
embodied learning as they explored ideas in AI). We took this approach to appeal to
students’ existing interests (Design Consideration #12 from Long & Magerko, 2020)
and to make AI more approachable (Zimmermann-Niefield et al., 2019).
To reduce the complexity of AI concepts, we decomposed concepts into their
key ideas (Design Consideration #5 from Long & Magerko, 2020) and leveraged
unplugged activities to teach students those ideas (Bell et al., 2009). The primary
benefits of unplugged lessons are that they remove programming as a barrier to
entry into computing ideas and rebuff the misconception that computer science is
primarily about programming (Bell et al., 2009). Unplugged activities like role-playing, simulation, and physical manipulatives in AI curricula have made it possible for
educators to present complex concepts without overwhelming students (Ali et al.,
2021a; DiPaola et al., 2020, 2021; Payne, 2020; TechGirlz, 2018). An example from

13

334

International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education (2023) 33:325–383

Fig. 1  Visual representation of the student/art teacher analogy to describe the generator and discriminator

the Creative AI curriculum is an analogy about a student and an art teacher to present the roles of generator networks and discriminator networks in general-adversarial networks (GANs) (Fig. 1). The analogy was relevant to students’ personal
experiences creating art in an art class, enabling them to comprehend an abstract AI
concept that might have otherwise been difficult to grasp.
Once students have a foundational understanding of AI, programming activities
can deepen their understanding through hands-on practice. However, the need for
extensive computing resources can make it infeasible to bring hands-on AI lessons
into the classroom.
Online tools such as the Teachable Machine (Fig. 2), Cognimates, Machine
Learning for Kids,9 LearningML, and our AI Blocks have made it easier for students
to train AI models without needing expensive, high-end hardware (Carney et al.,
2020; Druga, 2018; García et al., 2020; Jordan et al., 2021). Dancing with AI and
How to Train Your Robot heavily leveraged block-based programming languages,
which support beginners by abstracting away superfluous technical details, to give
students hands-on, AI creation opportunities. More examples of how we addressed
barriers to access in each curriculum is available in the third row of Table 1.
Curricula Descriptions
We applied the aforementioned curriculum design principles to three AI education curricula – Creative AI, Dancing with AI, and How to Train your Robot. A
comprehensive list of curricula activities can be found in Appendixes 1, 2 and 3.
9

Machine Learning 4 Kids by Dale Lane, https://​machi​nelea​rning​forki​ds.​co.​uk/

13

International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education (2023) 33:325–383

335

Fig. 2  Screenshot of the Teachable Machine interface, which abstracts away technical implementation
details, and advanced mathematics from student users. (Image from teachablemachine.withgoogle.com
website.)

More information about these curricula can also be accessed at https://​raise.​mit.​
edu. Each curriculum not only addresses the shortage of AI curricula for nonexperts, but they do so in a manner that allows students to understand the technology’s relevance to their own lives.
We designed our three curricula to promote the following learning outcomes
vis the specific content and active learning experiences for each topic:
• Technical AI Knowledge: Students can define AI and can identify AI sys-

tems in their daily lives and articulate what makes them AI. Students have a
practical understanding of how AI algorithms (pertaining to each curriculum)
function and humans’ role in creating AI systems.
• Ability to Think Critically about the Implications of AI: Students can think
critically about the potential benefits or harms of AI systems and their impact
on stakeholders. Students reflect on and discuss ethical issues (e.g., fairness,
privacy, and responsible design) as they relate to AI.
• Ability to Apply AI Knowledge: Students will be able to appropriately
employ their AI knowledge and skills to topics they personally care about.
Students can leverage skills like ethical thinking, creativity, empathy, and idea
synthesis as they create AI artifacts.
Creative AI
Despite the widespread use and misuse of generative ML in the media, there are few
existing efforts that educate school-age children on how AI can generate media and

13

336

International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education (2023) 33:325–383

the implications of this technology. The goal of this curriculum is to teach middleschool children about creative ML techniques and how people can partner with AI
to create digital art and expressive media. Students explored tools and techniques
such as neural networks and generative adversarial networks (GANs) across various
forms of media including text, images, and music. We developed web-based tools
that allow students to input their own text and drawings to generate new media, for
instance to create stories and illustrations using GANs. Throughout the workshop,
we discussed important ethical issues surrounding generative AI art that allowed students to reflect on how machine-created art differs from human-created art. Finally,
students learned about deepfakes, or fake media created by generative models that
can be used to deceive others. Students attempted to identify deepfakes, discussed
the harms of fake media, and learned about how misinformation, like deepfakes,
can spread online. Specific information about the activities in this curriculum can be
found in Appendix 1.
Dancing with AI
Many middle school students have interests in dance, art, physical movement in
sports, and video games with gestural interfaces. However, it is difficult to engage
with these interests in existing block-based coding environments. In this workshop,
we introduce a suite of AI-powered block-based coding tools and learning modules
in which students design, build, and reflect on interactive, movement-based, multimedia experiences through a user-friendly gestural interface. Students built projects with our two new sets of AI-powered blocks: hand/body/face position-tracking
and expression-detecting blocks, and blocks that allow students to import their own
image- and pose-recognition models trained with Google’s Teachable Machine. Our
programming platform10 leverages TensorflowJS (Smilkov et al., 2019), MediaPipe
(Zhang et al., 2020), and the Scratch Blocks open-source code repository11 to provide a browser-friendly programming platform (Jordan et al., 2021).
Students design and build AI-powered projects that align with their interests,
train their own supervised machine learning models, and reason about the ethics and
presence of AI systems in their everyday lives. Specific information about the activities in this curriculum can be found in Appendix 2.
How to Train Your Robot
In the How to Train Your Robot curriculum, students learn about AI technologies
relevant to machine learning and autonomous robotics, including speech and image
recognition (Williams et al., 2021). They learn about supervised machine learning,

10
Dancing with AI Programming platform, https://​mitme​dialab.​github.​io/​prg-​exten​sion-​boile​rplate/​create)
11
Scratch Github Repository by the Lifelong Kindergarten Group at the MIT Media Lab, https://​github.​
com/​LLK/

13

International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education (2023) 33:325–383

337

how to train models for use in applications and robotic agents, ways that ML models
can be vulnerable to error, and ethical design principles.
We developed a custom AI Blocks programming platform,12 forked from the
open-source Scratch Blocks code repository.13 With these AI blocks, students can
integrate image recognition models from Google’s Teachable Machine, text classification models, and the robot with everything else that Scratch has to offer. Students
used our robot platform, AI blocks, and ethical design methodologies to build AI
projects that serve and/or entertain others.
This curriculum and its associated robot kit was originally designed for and
deployed in classrooms for 30 h of in-person lessons. In the online version of the
workshop, we mailed Bluetooth robots14 (currently priced at $40 each) and allowed
students to keep the robots. The robot component proved effective in increasing students’ excitement about the topic and aided their understanding of computational
ideas. Specific information about the activities in this curriculum can be found in
Appendix 3.

Methodology
Research Questions
We collaborated with middle school teachers to pilot our curricula. To assess all
three curricula, we used a mixed-methods approach that was guided by the following research questions:
1. What knowledge and perceptions of AI do middle school students have before
they begin our workshop?
2. What kinds of understanding about AI do students demonstrate after engaging
in our lessons, interactive activities, and tools? What student-driven projects did
our curricula enable?
Online Study Context
Due to the health emergency caused by an outbreak of the COVID-19 virus in
2020, we were faced with the challenge of teaching our three new project-based
curricula, modified from in-person formats, using remote online learning techniques. All three curricula were deployed in synchronous online summer workshops, where students used Zoom video conferencing on their personal devices

12
How to Train Your Robot programming platform, https://​mitme​dialab.​github.​io/​prg-​exten​sion-​boile​
rplate/​robot​afe
13
Scratch Github Repository by the Lifelong Kindergarten Group at the MIT Media Lab, https://​github.​
com/​LLK/
14
Yahboom Tiny:bit robot car for micro:bit, https://​categ​ory.​yahbo​om.​net/​produ​cts/​tinyb​it?​varia​nt=​
28480​98972​4756

13

338

International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education (2023) 33:325–383

to participate, often a Chromebook, but students also used iPads and other
mobile devices. Workshops were run over the course of a single week (Monday
to Friday) with daily sessions that spanned 2–2.5 h (time-reduced from the inperson versions to prevent screen fatigue).
It was challenging to maintain the fidelity of the tangible and discussion-heavy
activities in a virtual setting since some students did not have technical resources
(microphone, camera, stable Internet connection), were uncomfortable speaking out
loud, or found it hard to stay engaged over a video call. We adapted our curricula
and teaching styles to accommodate student needs by using new and familiar collaborative classroom tools (namely Google Classroom, Google Slides, and Google
Forms) for students’ activities. To encourage collaboration, we made use of synchronous web tools, such as Google Sheets, and interactive tools developed using
web-sockets so that they could see each other’s work in real-time. This also allowed
teachers to view student work and help debug in real-time. Students used breakout
rooms and chat-based interactions to collaborate with one another, both to share
their ideas and ask for help. To aid in code debugging, we provided students with
instructions in different modalities, such as illustrated guides and video tutorials.

Teacher Training and Workshop Role
All three workshops were taught in partnership with middle-school teachers that
we recruited by leveraging Amazon Future Engineer mailing list. From a roster of
59 teachers who expressed interest in the program, we recruited 11 teachers from
around the United States (California, Florida, Georgia, New Jersey, New York,
Ohio, and Texas). We recruited two to five middle school teachers for each workshop based on their teaching background and expressed reason for interest. We compensated them $500 for their participation.
Teachers were simultaneously recruiters, trainees participating in professional
development, instructors, and teaching assistants. The professional development for
running the course took place before the workshops and at the end of every day
the workshop was offered. In these sessions, we reflected on the previous days lessons and ran through the activities for the following days. We encouraged teachers to actively shape the workshops by modifying existing lessons and introducing
new ideas. Since each workshop took place twice, we were able to implement feedback from teachers in the second round. After the workshops were completed, we
expected that teachers would become ambassadors for AI education, bringing what
they had learned into their classrooms and schools.
Participant Demographics
The Creative AI, Dancing with AI, and How to Train Your Robot curricula were
taught as three separate virtual workshops, each offered twice. The study protocol
was reviewed and approved by the Institutional Review Board at Massachusetts
Institute of Technology. Parents and students signed consent and assent forms,

13

International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education (2023) 33:325–383

339

Table 2  Students demographic information for each workshop
Workshop

Number of students Age

Gender

Creative AI

38

12.605 ± 0.975

F = 18, M = 20

Dancing with AI

21

11.857 ± 1.283

F = 12, M = 9

How to Train Your Robot

25

12.696 ± 1.343

F = 16, M = 6,
Prefer not to say = 3

respectively, to participate in the study. All the students were informed that the
workshop was a part of a research study, and that information would be collected
to evaluate and refine each workshop and associated materials. Further, participants
were assured that they could withdraw from the study at any point.
The authors, the majority of whom are women, African American, Asian American, and/or from low-income backgrounds prioritized inclusivity in recruiting and
conducting this study. We partnered with teachers to recruit students from a wide
range of backgrounds with varying levels of interest and exposure to Computer Science. Teachers recruited between 6—12 middle school students, depending on the
capacity of the workshop, and strove for a 50/50 gender balance. A total of 78 students participated in the study ranging in age from 12.44 ± 1.32 years old (Table 2).
Six (6) students participated in two workshops.
We do not report students’ race or socioeconomic background because we do not
analyze our results through the lens of these sensitive demographic factors. However, we asked teachers to recruit students that were representative of the populations of their schools.
Six (6) out of 10 participating schools were Title 1 schools. The United States of
America designates schools as Title 1 if at least 40% of students come from households below the poverty threshold.15 Of the remaining schools, one was a private,
charter school where 96% of the students are African, Hispanic, or Indigenous
Americans. Another school was a homeschool organization for students with special
needs and their families; all their students are African Americans. The third school
was a public, magnet school that serves students in rural midwestern communities.
And the fourth school was a public school where 32.8% of students are African, Hispanic, or Indigenous Americans.
Data Collection
Pre‑Questionnaire
To assess participants’ familiarity with and perceptions of Artificial Intelligence, students were administered a pre-test questionnaire using a Google Form on the first day
of the study. The questions spanned across three categories: prior experience, or their

15
Improving Basic Programs Operated by Local Educational Agencies (Title I, Part A), https://​www2.​
ed.​gov/​progr​ams/​title​iparta/​index.​html

13

340

International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education (2023) 33:325–383

existing familiarity with AI and technology; AI perception, or their current understanding of the capabilities of AI; and self-perception, or their understanding of themselves
and their relationships with AI. A full list of questions can be found in Appendices D
through F.
Workshop‑Specific Assessments
The remainder of the assessments occurred in the context of the activities that students completed in each workshop. These assessments were tailored to the content and
activities that students did in each workshop. We analyzed them using mixed quantitative and qualitative approaches to capture rich information about how much students
learned. Specifically, we used:
• Statistical metrics to compare pre-post questionnaires about students’ understanding

of AI concepts.

• Thematic coding based on grounded coding theory (Thornberg and Charmaz,

2014) to inspect the conclusions (and misconceptions) students had about AI after
completing activities.
• Rubrics to evaluate the projects students generated as they applied their understanding of technical and ethical concepts to problems of personal interest.

Results
In this section, we seek to answer our two research questions:
1. What knowledge and perceptions of AI do middle school students have before
they begin our workshop?
2. What kinds of understanding about AI do students demonstrate after engaging
in our lessons, interactive activities, and tools? What open-ended projects did
students make with our AI tools?
We will explore these questions by analyzing students’ response to the pre-test and
post-test questionnaires as well as their engagement and performance in the lessons and
activities.
Students’ Understanding and Perceptions of AI across all Workshops
Prior Experience and Familiarity with AI
We found that students were overall extremely aware of the existence of artificial
intelligence. Across all three curricula, 90.5% (n = 74 total responses) of students
had heard of AI before and an overwhelming majority of students had interacted
with AI integrated technologies such as YouTube (100%, n = 45), Google Search
(95.6%, n = 43), and Netflix (88.9%, n = 40) before (Fig. 3). When we asked students to define AI, the most common words in their definitions were “intelligence”

13

International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education (2023) 33:325–383

341

Fig. 3  Most students across the three workshops were also active users of technologies that leverage AI,
especially YouTube, Google Search, Email, Netflix, Tablets and Gaming Systems

(54.1%, n = 37), “human(s)” (48.6%, n = 37), “artificial” (37.8%, n = 37), “machines”
(32.4%, n = 37), “robots” (29.7, n = 37), “computer” (29.7%, n = 37), and “learn”
(16.2%, n = 37).
Related to students’ prior experiences with technology, we also wanted to understand the extent to which they recognized how much they used AI in everyday life.
We asked if the following technologies used AI: Google Search, Wireless Printers,
Video Calls (e.g., Facetime, Zoom), Game Consoles (e.g. Xbox, Switch), YouTube
(“Up next” recommendations), Movie Recommendations (Netflix, Amazon Prime,
Hulu), Snapchat Filters, GPS Apps (e.g. Google Maps, Waze), and Voice Assistants
(e.g. Alexa, Siri, Google Home). Except for Video Calls, more than half of students
said that every example used AI.
Students were most confident that Voice Assistants (93.2% “Does use AI”,
n = 44), Google Search (79.6%, n = 44), Game Consoles (77.3%, n = 44), and
GPS Apps (72.7%, n = 44) use AI. Since students erred on the side of calling
items AI, the majority correctly identified the examples that truly were AI:
Google Search, YouTube’s “Up next” recommendations, Movie Recommendations, Snapchat filters, GPS Apps, and Voice Assistants. Students were least sure
whether Video Calls (21.6% said “Not sure this uses AI”, n = 37), Game Consoles (13.64%, n = 44), Snapchat Filters (13.62%, n = 44), and Wireless Printers
(13.51%, n = 37) used AI. These results point to the need to help students systematically reason through what truly makes something AI.
Students’ Perceptions of AI
When asked about what they think AI can do, applications such as mathematical operations and face recognition were most popular. Students also believed
that AI could create music (89.2%, n = 37) and make a painting (77.8%, n = 37).
Responses such as baking a cake (35.1%, n = 37), styling hair (43.2%, n = 37) and

13

342

International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education (2023) 33:325–383

Fig. 4  Students’ perceptions of capabilities of AI

Fig. 5  Terms that students used to describe AI

hitting a baseball (48.6%, n = 37) were less popular. Media portrayal of AI capabilities, as well as AI tools in applications familiar to children (such as face recognition in social media) seemed to have an influence in their perception of AI
capabilities (Fig. 4).

13

International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education (2023) 33:325–383

343

Fig. 6  Students’ self-perception in relation to AI technologies

In terms of how they saw AI playing out in technology, more students believed
that AI would make jobs easier (73.0%, n = 37) rather than take over jobs. These
students represented one group of respondents who had a positive view of AI. The
10 students who answered that AI can take over jobs also described AI as scary and
potentially harmful (Fig. 5).
Students’ Attitudes toward Learning AI
We observed that only a small minority of students answered that they were smarter
than AI (17.1%, n = 35), and only 33.3% (n = 37) of students believed that they
exclusively could exclusively control AI. Students seemed to believe in the collaborative potential of AI, however, with 81.1% (n = 37) reporting that they believed the
relationship between themselves and AI was symbiotic, such that humans and AI
could both have control of technology (Fig. 6).
In the pre-test, students also showed that 62.9% (n = 35 total responses) of students want to work with computers and technology in the future, and 71.4% considered themselves to be tech savvy; only 14.3% of students reported that they found
computers confusing, and only 11.4% (n = 35) said that they do not know a lot about
computers. Unsurprisingly, 71.4% (n = 35) of students also reported being interested
in learning about technology; students in these pilots were hand-picked by their
teachers as good candidates for participating in the classes. Out of (n = 35) students,
74.3% students had family members or friends who worked with computers and
technology.

13

344

International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education (2023) 33:325–383

Table 3  Number of correct responses for each statement, n = 11 responses
Question Statement

Correct Answer # Correct
(pre-test, out
of 11)

# Correct
(post-test, out
of 11)

Q1.1—A generator and discriminator are both neural
networks

True

7

8

Q1.2—The generator and discriminator are working
in competition with one another

True

2

4

Q1.3—The discriminator gives feedback to the
generator

True

5

8

Throughout their workshops, students completed activities that we used to collect
data about their understanding of AI concepts. The next section reports the results of
students’ technical and ethical understanding of lessons from the Creative AI, Dancing with AI, and How to Train Your Robot lessons.

Students’ Understanding of Creative AI Lessons
The key objectives for the Creative AI curriculum are to have students understand
GANs and how machines generate art. Students explored positive, like human-AI
collaborative art, and negative, like fake media and disinformation, applications of
generative algorithms that we see today.
The learning objectives of Creative AI include:
• Understanding generative algorithms and their applications: Students can

describe how GANs work, infer how different examples of GANs were built, and
apply techniques to determine if a piece of media was likely to be produced by
GANs
• Foreseeing the social impact of algorithms: Students can evaluate a GAN system for the potential beneficial and harmful ways it may be used in society
• Creating collaborative human-AI artifacts: Students can use generative tools
for creative expression
The following sections explore students’ performance on the activities related to
these ideas. Students responded to these questions as a part of the workshop activities or during a reflection period at the end of the day. Students created art with generative algorithms on the last day of the workshop.
Technical Understanding: How GANs work
We asked students two assessment questions before and after the workshop. The
first question had three parts where students had to mark statements about GANs as
“True” or “False”. Their responses are shown in Table 3.

13

International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education (2023) 33:325–383

345

Fig. 7  Students’ responses when they were asked if certain media were GAN-generated or not (they were
all GAN-generated)

Fig. 8  GAN Tools (left to right): 1) This Person Does Not Exist is a website that curates fake faces generated using StyleGan2 that has been trained on human faces to generate fake human faces using GANs
(Karras et al., 2019). 2) Developed by Xinhua and the Chinese search engine, these AI-powered news
anchors were developed through machine learning to simulate the voice, facial movements, and gestures
of real-life broadcasters (Kuo, 2018). 3) Built by Google Creative Lab, Sketch RNN is an interactive web
experiment that lets you draw together with a recurrent neural network model (Ha & Eck, 2017). 4) Built
by Yotam Mann and Google, this web tool utilizes generative piano music to let users play a duet with
the computer. Users press keys to play a music note, and AI Duet adds some notes to form a duet (Karras
et al., 2019)

The second question asked students about how GANs work: “A GAN is being
trained to generate images of clouds. The generator creates an image and sends it
over to the discriminator. The discriminator does not classify the image as a cloud.
What happens next?” Students had to choose the correct answer out of four options:
a) the discriminator tries to generate a new image this time, b—correct) the generator generates a new image based on feedback from the discriminator, c) the discriminator changes the dataset it is trained on, d) the generator generates a new image randomly and sends it back to the discriminator, or e) I am unsure. A total of seventeen
(17) students answered this question. More students selected the correct answer, b,
at the end of the workshop (70.6%) versus the beginning of the workshop (41.2%).
With the goal of understanding what students believe AI can create, in the
GANs or Not activity, students judged whether fourteen distinct pieces of generative media were created by a generative model or not. Media consisted of photos,

13

346

International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education (2023) 33:325–383

audio, and text, and was copied into Google Slides. The correct answer to all questions was “Yes, the media was made by a generative tool.” A full breakdown of student responses can be found in Fig. 7. More students thought that the Style Transfer
image, generated colors, and generated digits were created by a GAN, relative to
those who did not think it was created by a GAN.
In the Exploring GANs activity, students explored up to four web tools that utilize generative ML. Students had 10 min to try out four different GAN tools that are
hosted online (Fig. 8). After they explored these tools, they were asked to pick one
and identify: 1) what the generator in the GAN was trying to generate, and 2) what
dataset the discriminator in the GAN was basing its decisions on. Students could
respond for up to four tools depending on how long it took. Of the 58 responses,
65% of student responses were able to correctly identify what the generator was trying to generate, and 61% of student responses were able to correctly identify the
dataset that the discriminator was trained on.
Ethical Understanding: Understanding the Societal Implications of Generative
Machine Learning
We asked students to consider the ethical implications of GANs by identifying the
potential benefits and harms of the GAN tools they explored in the Exploring GANs
activity. Two researchers grouped students’ responses into clusters, achieving a
percent agreement of 92%. As an example, researchers coded a students’ response
“teach kids how to draw” as a benefit of Sketch-RNN under “learning.”
The 58 students who submitted responses reported a more potential benefits (79)
than harms (60) as shown in Fig. 9. There was a difference in the number of benefits and harms identified for the kinds of tools. We observed that students identified
more benefits of purely artistic tools such as Sketch RNN and AI Duet and more
harms of GAN tools that generated human faces or videos such as AI News anchor
or This Person Does Not Exist. Students associated these tools, which generate
anthropomorphic media, with potential harms including “deception” or “policing.”
In the “Spotting Deepfakes” activity, students took to a quiz to identify whether
something was a deepfake or not, learned strategies for spotting deepfakes, and then
retook the same deepfake quiz. There was no significant change between the prequiz (M = 53.44, sd = 14.73) and post-quiz (M = 53.55, sd = 15.18), t(30) = -0.03,
p = 0.98.
Many students mentioned how difficult it was to tell if something was a deepfake
or not, even after they had learned techniques to detect them:
“Today, the main thing I learned is how to see if a video or picture is a deepfake/made by AI. I also learned how AI can generate things like pictures and
stories using data... I found the deepfake exercise really hard, this is because
AI videos can be very convincing.” (Coral,16 female, 12 years old)
Students explained that difficulties came from the fact that they were required to
“pay attention” to “small details”:
16

All participant names have been changed to preserve their privacy.

13

International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education (2023) 33:325–383

347

Fig. 9  Students identified benefits (top) and harms (bottom) of the GAN tools that they explored

“The activity if we had to identify if it was a deepfake or not was hard. It was
very hard to tell if it was. There are so many miniature details that you have to
look at, and that makes it really tricky.” (Camila, female, 10 years old)
Applying Knowledge: Creating with GANs
A total of 33 students completed and submitted the final project – a story created
with the text and image generator tools. The text generator tool allowed students
to generate a story by applying a text style from one of 34 books or authors onto

13

348

International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education (2023) 33:325–383

Fig. 10  A generative story created by a student using the image and text generation tools

user-provided seed text. The image generator tool allowed them to create a drawing
and then stylize it with a chosen visual style (e.g., a ‘cat’ style). Students tended to
pick text styles that were more familiar or child friendly. For instance, 14 (42.42%,
n = 33) students chose the Dr. Seuss style, 7 (21.21%, n = 33) chose the Harry Potter
style, 3 (9.09%, n = 33) chose the Wizard of Oz style, 2 (6.06%, n = 33) chose Williams Shakespeare, Carl Sagan, Knock-knock jokes, and Life of Pi styles each. One
student used the Dracula style. No students chose the more unfamiliar subjects such
as Virginia Woolf or the novel Pride or Prejudice. The seed text that students provided the style generators were all based on personal or fictional narratives inspired
by the generative images.
Since this was an open-ended creative activity, we made observations of students’
process rather than grading their work against a rubric. We consistently observed
students trying out different seed text prompts and generative styles as they worked
toward their final project. For example, one student began their project by opening
the image generation tool and drawing a snake. She then used the lollipop style to
transform her snake drawing. Then she moved to the text generation tool and entered
the seed text, “It’s sunny out today” with the text style from the novel Life of Pi. She
adjusted the temperature and length variables of the text generator tool until she was
happy with the outcome. She then combined the generated text with the generated
image on a Google Slide to form the generative story shown in Fig. 10.
After completion of the activity, we asked students to reflect upon what they
learned and enjoy from the day. This student reflected on image generation, saying:
“I liked the picture activity. I liked this because it was fun to see how something look like if it were the other thing. Like a lollipop as a snake!” (Hua,
female, 13 years old)

13

International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education (2023) 33:325–383

349

Fig. 11  An example of the “Strike a Pose” worksheet students completed to compare image and pose
models

In other students’ reflections, they demonstrated an understanding of AI
capabilities:
“I learned that AI could make sentences based off other Authors styles,”
(Ijeoma, female, 11 years old).
and the implications of using generative technologies:
“I liked the story generating thing because it shows that an AI can impersonate
somebody else.” (Ijeoma, female, 11 years old)
Students’ Understanding of Dancing with AI Lessons
The learning objectives in this curriculum primarily center around AI4K12’s Big
Idea #4 Natural Interaction (Touretzky et al., 2019b), as movement and dancing play
an integral contextual role in children’s learning. We emphasized critical thinking of
the implications of AI technology, as well as their ability to apply their knowledge to
societally relevant projects that students completed at the end of the workshop. The
learning objectives of the Dancing with AI curriculum are as follows:
• Training supervised machine learning models from data: Students under-

stand the relevance of datasets to machine learning models and how different
dataset features impact the performance of a model
• Ethics and societal impact of AI systems: Students evaluate models on metrics
such as fairness and propose ways to make AI systems fairer. Students predict
the ethical implications of AI models and systems on stakeholders and society
• Designing interactive AI Systems: Students learn how to incorporate AI models in programming projects and design creative, natural human-AI interactions
The following sections explore students’ performance on assessment questions
related to these ideas. Students answered comprehension questions as they progressed through the day and completed a final project in the last two days of the
workshop.

13

350

International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education (2023) 33:325–383

Table 4  Common themes in students’ reflections on the Strike a Pose Activity, n = 10
1: “What are the differences between images and poses?”
Common themes in students’ responses

Number of students with response

Pose models focus on a person and their joints
Image models worked better / pose models are more easily deceived
Image models pay attention to features (e.g., colors, shapes, structure, size)
Pose models ignore backgrounds
Other

5
3
3
2
2

Technical Understanding: Importance of Data Representation
In this activity, students explored the difference between images and poses as
forms of representation by training their own image and pose models in Teachable
Machine. Students filled out a worksheet (Fig. 11) where they trained image models
with three different images, and pose models with three different poses, and were
then asked to compare the two forms of representation.
After students created the two kinds of models, we asked them open ended
questions:
1) “What are the differences between images and poses?”
2) “What are the pros and cons of using images vs. poses as your chosen form of
data representation?” to see if they picked up on the differences between the two.
We expected that students would see that image models focused on several features while pose models only looked at limbs and joints on a human silhouette.
This difference makes image representations more versatile, since it can be used on
objects as well as people; however, the pose representation was optimal for preserving privacy and ignoring extraneous features like background. We had one researcher
go through students’ responses and group them based on themes (Table 4).
Of the ten students who completed the worksheet, five (5) correctly observed that
pose models focused on body joints. Three of the students listed some of the features that image models recognize that pose models do not, including size, color,
and shapes. Two students then made the further connection that image models are
more versatile, in the sense that they could recognize objects as well as people and
that they can be more accurate at recognizing objects even if they are placed in different locations.
In listing the pros and cons of each representation, students explored how the goal
of a machine learning system could dictate which one was more appropriate. Due to
some of the limitations of image models, such as needing to be careful about colors,
there are situations where a pose model would be more appropriate. However, in
using a pose model, students noted important considerations like making sure the
body was a certain distance from the camera. A misconception that appeared in two

13

International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education (2023) 33:325–383

351

students’ responses was that pose models require a user to hold still while training.
Pose models can be trained on sequences of movements as well as still poses.
Ethical Understanding: Identifying Bias and Critiquing Machine Learning Models
Students engaged in the “Examples of Classification in AI” to learn about how classifiers work at a high level, and how machine learning algorithms identify features
within images to classify them. Instructors walked through an example of how a
classifier trained on large white marshmallows might fare on classifying small pink
marshmallows. Then, students answered questions about three different machine
learning scenarios that demonstrated dataset bias. In one scenario:
“You have a sorting algorithm that looks at images of apples. It classifies
RED apples as ‘apples’, but it classifies YELLOW and GREEN apples as ‘not
apples’. What data do you think the algorithm was trained on?”
All 18 student respondents selected the correct multiple-choice answer that the
machine must have been trained only on apples that were red. The second scenario
involved a system that classified pictures of mail-presenting persons as doctors and
female-presenting persons as nurses. Out of 18 students, 17 correctly declared that
this was most likely due to a dataset that had few or no examples of female doctors
or male nurses. Finally, the third scenario presented a situation in an M&M factory
where a worker is tasked with labelling the candies as “yummy” or “not yummy.”
The scenario discloses that the person prefers green M&Ms. We asked students to
infer the implications of this preference on the resulting dataset and 14 out of 14 correctly stated that the dataset would likely show a clear preference for green M&Ms.
Next, we asked students questions to reflect on each example of bias by answering
the following questions:
1.2)
2.2)

“How would you make the apples dataset better?”
“Why do you think that the model for identifying nurses and doctors might
be harmful to society?”
3.2)
“The M&M factory adds a new color of M&M (pink) to the types of M&Ms!
How do you think the training algorithm will classify it, and why?”
We expected that students would be able to apply their knowledge of machine
learning models and technology’s societal impact in their answers. We analyzed
the students’ responses to these open-ended questions by having two researchers
identify common themes in the responses and coding each response appropriately.
Researchers worked collaboratively until they reached consensus, thus we did not
calculate percent agreement. Twelve (12) out of 17 respondents suggested acceptable ways to address the error in the apple dataset – by training it with differently
colored apples or by changing the data representation of the model to rely on the
detection of apple features (e.g., stems) rather than colors. Four (4) respondents gave
a less satisfying answer, asserting that the dataset could be trained with more data
but not specifying what data it should be trained with.

13

352

International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education (2023) 33:325–383

Fig. 12  A student final project that had a sprite tell the user to smile if it detected an eyebrow furrow

In discussing the potential harms of the biased doctor-nurse model, we expected
students to pick up on various levels of issues with the system. At the most basic
level, students recognized that the output of the system was inaccurate (2 students)
since doctor and nurse professions are not tied to gender. At the next level, students
observed that the model discriminated based on gender and was not just inaccurate
but perpetuated a harmful stereotype. Students at this level described the system as
sexist (6 students) and offensive (1 student). At the highest level, two (2) students
connected the model’s discriminative behavior to algorithmic bias within the system
that might not be visible to users but could still cause unfair outcomes. For example,
the model could be used in a robot that treated women differently than men without
explaining why.
Finally, in the M&M example, nine (9) out of 14 respondents correctly guessed
that a potentially biased M&M sorter would most likely classify inputs it had not
seen before as “not yummy.” Students’ reasons for this behavior fell into one of two
groups: either the system would only classify green M&Ms as yummy or that the
system would think the pink M&M looked similar to red M&Ms that it had seen
before. Despite the subtle difference between these two responses, the pink M&M
looking more like the class of “not yummy” M&Ms is the most accurate answer. The
other five (5) respondents to this question gave incorrect answers. Two (2) students
thought the sorter might classify the new color of M&M as tasty since it “looks like
an M&M” and, therefore, customers might enjoy it. These students did not seem to
understand that the model would compare any new input to its training set examples
of what is yummy and what is not. This same idea seemed to be missed by the 3 students who believed the model did not have enough information to decide. Unless it
is explicitly trained not to, this algorithm will try to force a decision.

13

International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education (2023) 33:325–383

353

Applying Knowledge: Final Projects Using PoseBlocks
To evaluate students’ grasp of the interactive AI concepts within Dancing with AI,
we examined the final projects students created in our block-based programming
platform (Fig. 12). Out of the 21 student participants, 13 submitted at least partial
projects. Ten submitted and/or demoed their final project, and out of these, 5 used
the Teachable Machine integrated blocks, 4 used the hand/face/body sensing blocks,
and 1 made a non-AI related project. Applications of student projects included
health and well-being (3), games (3), education (2), emotion recognition (1), and
chores (1). Furthermore, as a part of their final project, students were asked to not
only implement their idea, but also to create an ethical matrix for it. Eight students
submitted complete ethical matrices.
To evaluate the effectiveness of our interactive activities and our project-based
teaching method in helping students apply AI concepts to their own lives, we developed a rubric for students’ final projects. The rubric evaluates projects 1) technically on their problem selection, identification of an appropriate training dataset, 2)
ethically on their identification of values stakeholders, and 3) on programming and
model implementation. Two researchers independently rated projects final projects
on a scale of 1-project does not meet expectations to 4-project exceeds expectations
(the interrater reliability was 0.77). A project met our technical design expectations
if it was a well-scoped project that did not propose a task beyond the capabilities of
computer algorithms. We also wanted students to identify the inputs and outputs of
the dataset they would use to train a machine learning model if that was the kind of
project they chose to make. A project met our ethical design expectations if students
could identify at least three appropriate stakeholders for their project and at least
three values those stakeholders might have. We provided students with an example
project ethical matrix, so at least two of the students’ stakeholders had to be different
from what was on the example. Finally, a project met our implementation expectations if the submitted code ran correctly. If we could debug students’ code to make
it function, then we rated it as “approaching expectations.” If the submitted project
included a machine learning model, we expected that the model would function correctly when we tested it. Table 5 shows the distribution of students’ scores on the
final project.
Students received mostly satisfactory evaluations in their problem selection, programming, and model construction. Students whose projects had non-AI applications, such as games, or did not make projects with the provided AI-integrated PoseBlocks, received fewer points; students who chose a problem that contributed to the
world around them were scored higher. These projects showed the extent to which
students were thinking about how to solve the problems around them. For example,
several students made mask identifiers for COVID-19, ranking the masks by how
valuable they were to preventing disease. One student created a project that could
identify trash using a Teachable Machine classifier. Another created a project using
the face sensing blocks that could tell a user to cheer up. Overall, students’ ability
to successfully identify problems in their own world and build solutions to address
them demonstrates their technical reasoning and computational action thinking.

13

13

n = 5 responses

Identification of dataset

n = 9 responses

Identification of stakeholder values

n = 10 programs

n = 5 ML models

Programming

Model

Implementation

n = 7 responses

Identification of stakeholders

Ethical Design

n = 11 responses

Problem selection

Technical Design

Rubric Score

Table 5  Dancing with AI: Distribution of students’ final project scores

2 (40%)

4 (40%)

1 (11%)

2 (29%)

1 (20%)

1 (9%)

4 – Project exceeds
expectations

2 (40%)

3 (30%)

5 (56%)

4 (57%)

4 (80%)

7 (64%)

3 – Project meets
expectations

0 (0%)

1 (10%)

2 (22%)

2 (29%)

0 (0%)

3 (27%)

2 – Project approaches
expectations

1 (20%)

2 (20%)

1 (11%)

1 (14%)

0 (0%)

0 (0%)

1 – Project does
not meet expectations

354
International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education (2023) 33:325–383

International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education (2023) 33:325–383

355

Fig. 13  An image of a slide used in an introduction of neural networks for image recognition. The slide
shows how the image of a cat is broken down into pixels, then pixels are combined to recognize highlevel features of an object, such as whiskers

Students struggled the most with identifying stakeholder values on their ethical
matrices. Several students copied values for their project directly from the given
ethical matrix example, and most students did not manage to provide the requested
minimum of four values. This perhaps was because instructors only had a few examples and a single activity on how to use it as a tool. In order to further support students in thinking ethically about their work, it may be useful to integrate an ethical
matrix into all the mini projects that precede the final project.
Students’ Understanding of How to Train Your Robot Lessons
The main goal of the How to Train Your Robot curriculum is to help students understand machine learning algorithms, including neural networks and K Nearest Neighbors, and how they are used in AI systems. Like the other curricula, we also wanted
students to be able to identify the stakeholders impacted by an AI system and to
apply their knowledge of AI in a final project.
The learning objectives of How to Train Your Robot include:
• Understanding supervised machine learning algorithms: Students can articu-

late how neural networks and K Nearest Neighbors algorithms learn from datasets to make predictions
• Identifying stakeholders of AI systems: Students identify the stakeholders and
values relevant to the design of AI systems

13

356

International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education (2023) 33:325–383

Table 6  Features of card suits which students identified, and we judged as correct, 17 responses
Correct features a neural network might use to distinguish card suits

Number of students
who identified
feature

Color
Examples: Different color by pattern, colors, red color, black color

16

Sharp points
Examples: pointed edges, tips or points, points, sharp edges

14

References to edges
Examples: curve shape, inward curves, flat sides

7

Circle shapes
Examples: bubbles, circles, bubble placement

3

Other
Examples: degrees of angles, indentations, flat bottoms

6

• Developing AI Systems: Students create machine learning models for use in

projects that meet a need or address a problem. Students design mechanisms that
maximize benefits to stakeholders

The following sections explore students’ performance on assessment questions
related to these ideas. Students answered comprehension questions at the end of the
day material was presented and then completed a final project in the last two days of
the workshop.
Technical Understanding: Understanding Dataset Features for Image Recognition
In the neural network activity, students learned about how neural networks can classify images by comparing features of an input image to features found in a training
set. Students were taught that features were visual elements pertaining to a picture
that were combinations of simple shapes. For example, in the example slide shown
in Fig. 13, instructors described how a neural network trained on images of cats and
dogs would break an image down into pixels, and then use linear combinations of
those pixels to recognize features like whiskers, head shapes, and mouth shapes in
its last layers. The instructor demonstrated how image models work by creating a
model to recognize rock, paper, and scissors hand signs. Then, students had time
to explore image recognition by creating their own image recognition models and
using them in programming projects.
After this, students completed an assessment that asked, “What features might a
neural network look at to distinguish the suits of cards ♦♥♣♠?” Students could list
up to 5 different features a neural network might use. We expected that students who
correctly understood features would be able to list several distinguishing appearance characteristics that can be used to distinguish the shapes. We evaluated student
responses by having the authors identify reasonable features that a neural network
for image recognition, as presented in the workshop, might use including color,

13

International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education (2023) 33:325–383

357

sharp points, curved edges, and straight edges. As two researchers read through the
seven student responses, they grouped them together and judged them as correct or
incorrect based on the original list of correct answers. All correct answers are shown
in Table 6.
The average student listed 4.65 features and we judged that 2.82 correctly aligned
with how neural networks function. The remaining 1.83 features were suggestions
that were infeasible for the kinds of neural networks students learned about (e.g.,
“[the neural network] would count the number of sides”), features that could not
be used to distinguish these shapes (e.g. “size”), and features that were too vague
(e.g. “one is shaped like a heart”). In our explanation of neural networks (Fig. 13)
we pointed out that neural networks identify features but did not specify that neural
networks cannot count. Clearing up this discrepancy could be solved by explicitly
pointing out that fact and by asking students to draw, rather than describe, features
that could distinguish the card suits.
Ethical Understanding: Identifying Stakeholders in Real‑World AI Systems
On Day 3, students used an ethical matrix to redesign the Amazon Echo, a voice
assistant designed for the home, to be more useful in classrooms. Students considered how prioritizing the interests and concerns of different groups might impact the
final design of the voice assistant. In groups, students chose the stakeholders and
the values, or key design issues, to consider in their selection of new features for the
Amazon Echo. With this activity, we expected students to develop an appreciation
for the role of stakeholders in the design thinking process (DiPaola et al., 2020).
At the end of Day 3, we gave students an assessment question to test their ability
to independently identify stakeholders and stakeholder values:
“Amazon is coming out with a smart toaster. A customer will be able to tell
their toaster what kind of food they are toasting (slice of bread, bagel, waffle,
pizza bites) and it will automatically set the timer and toast their food to their
liking.
Before selling the toaster to hungry customers all over the world, who are
some stakeholders Amazon should consult and what are some issues they
might care about?”
Students had space to record up to 3 stakeholders and their values. We expected
them to select a range of stakeholders from customers to the company and even
regulatory bodies. For values, we expected students to identify items that were
meaningfully connected to the stakeholders and this specific design scenario. For
example, a value such as ‘Safety’ would make sense while one like ‘Unemployment’
would not make sense.
We received 10 completed ethical matrices that one researcher analyzed by
grouping similar stakeholder-value pairs. The most common stakeholders students
proposed were customers (8 out of 10 responses) and the company developing the
toaster (8 out of 10 responses). Collectively, students focused on money (10 out of
10 responses) and the reception of the toaster’s features (7 out of 10 responses) as

13

358

International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education (2023) 33:325–383

Fig. 14  Screenshot of a student’s final project that used image recognition to detect different injuries and
give a user assistance. The students’ stage, where the application runs, shows a micro:bit robot saying, “I
am your Mini Medical Robot!” with two images of fingers next to it. One image is of a finger with a cut,
the stage shows a classifier labeling that image as “Cut” with 100% confidence. The other image shows a
finger that is healthy; it is classified as “Healthy Skin” with 99% confidence. In the toolbox you can see
some of the students’ code which uses ‘Event’ blocks to have the robot give the user instructions on what
to do if their skin is cut or not

important drivers for design. This occurrence mirrors findings from DiPaola et al.
(2020) where students often identified money and popularity as driving design agendas for YouTube’s recommendation algorithm. Besides customers and the company,
three (3) students who considered other parts of the product’s supply chain: manufacturers, the shipping company, and investors.
In the values that students identified, we saw that students recognized a conflict of interest between customers / companies’ vs other stakeholders. According
to students, the company and its customers cared most about how well the toaster’s features worked (5 out of 10 responses). The company’s suppliers, on the other
hand, cared a lot more about how production costs constrained costs (3 out of 10
responses). This shows some student awareness of different priorities that could create tension between stakeholders.
Applying Knowledge: Final Projects on AI for Social Good
To evaluate the usability of the tools and their ability to stimulate students’ creativity, we examined the kinds of projects that students created with them. All students
designed a final project with one pair of siblings collaborating on a project which
resulted in 24 project designs. Fourteen out of 24 projects used machine learning
algorithms, eight of the remaining projects used robotics but no machine learning,
and one built on a binary decision-making activity we did the second day. Applications of student projects included entertainment (7 projects), helping people (7
projects), healthcare (5), science (3), and education (2). The primary beneficiaries

13

International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education (2023) 33:325–383

359

of students’ projects were children and teens (5 projects), their families (2) and their
communities (2) (Fig. 14).
To evaluate the extent to which students were able to apply their knowledge to
their own projects, we developed a rubric, similar to the Dancing with AI final project rubric, to evaluate projects. The rubric evaluates projects 1) technically on their
problem selection, identification of training data, and identification of testing data,
2) ethically on their identification of stakeholders, identification of potential risks,
and the design of a user feedback loop and 3) on programming and model implementation. A project met our technical design expectations if it was a well-scoped
project that did not propose a task beyond the capabilities of computer algorithms.
For students who did machine learning projects, we also wanted them to describe
the training data and test data they would use to construct and evaluate their model.
A project met our ethical design expectations if students could identify at least three
appropriate stakeholders for their project. We asked that students think about how
stakeholders might benefit from or be put at risk by their algorithms; we expected
them to adequately describe the possible positive and negative impacts of their
algorithms. We also expected students to design a feedback mechanism for users
that could mitigate some of the risks students described. Finally, a project met our
implementation expectations if the submitted code ran correctly. If we could debug
students’ code to make it function, then we rated it as “approaching expectations.”
If the submitted project included a machine learning model, we expected that the
model would function correctly and use an appropriate number of training examples. Using these guidelines, two researchers independently rated projects final projects on a scale of 1 to 4 (interrater reliability 0.78).
As seen in Table 7, almost all students met expectations in their problem
selection, programming, and model construction. One student, who received an
‘Approaches expectations’ rating on ‘Problem selection’, selected a task that was not
well-suited to a K Nearest Neighbors algorithm. They wanted to use it to distinguish
symptoms of a cold, a flu, and COVID-19, however there were too many overlaps in
the symptoms.
Three projects lost points in ‘Programming implementation’ for using a programming block incorrectly. One was about classifying animals by describing them,
another was about classifying foods as safe for dogs or not, and the last one was
about diagnosing concussions by symptoms. They all contained a common bug
where students misunderstood how to use variable to get input from the user. The
final project that lost points on programming was a functioning remote control for
the robot, but it did not use and of the algorithms or ideas we explored in class. Two
text classification projects lost points on their ‘Model implementation’. One of the
projects, the safe dog food application, lost points for having an unbalanced dataset.
The class with safe dog foods had many more training examples (27) than the class
with unsafe dog foods (14) which led to a bug where the model tended to think
foods were safe. The other project, the concussion symptom application, lost points
for having fewer than five training examples in the classes of their text classifier.
Students struggled the most with identifying a plan for testing their model, failing
to include a source for testing data outside of training data. A big issue in the ethical design of projects was that students neglected to design an appropriate feedback

13

13

n = 14 responses

N = 11 responses

Identification of training data

Identification of testing data

n = 16 responses

n = 16 responses

Identification of potential risks

Design of appropriate feedback loop

n = 13 programs

n = 5 ML models

Programming

Model

Implementation

n = 20 responses

Identification of stakeholders

Ethical Design

n = 23 responses

Problem selection

Technical Design

Rubric Score

2 (40%)

2 (15%)

0 (0%)

0 (0%)

0 (0%)

0 (0%)

0 (0%)

0 (0%)

4 – Project exceeds
expectations

Table 7  How to Train Your Robot: Distribution of students’ final project scores

1 (20%)

7 (54%)

11 (68%)

12 (75%)

20 (100%)

8 (73%)

11 (79%)

21 (91%)

3 – Project meets
expectations

2 (40%)

4 (31%)

3 (19%)

1 (6%)

0 (0%)

0 (0%)

0 (0%)

2 (9%)

2 – Project approaches
expectations

0 (0%)

0 (0%)

2 (13%)

3 (19%)

0 (0%)

3 (27%)

3 (21%)

0 (0%)

1 – Project does
not meet expectations

360
International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education (2023) 33:325–383

International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education (2023) 33:325–383

361

loop for users to improve the system. For example, in a math-tutor robot project, the
student wanted to survey students on how much they liked the robot, but they did
not consider evaluating if students’ mathematics scores improved. To support future
students in their design of projects, it may be helpful to implement more peer and
stakeholder feedback while students are designing.

Discussion
In this section, we will reflect on the effectiveness of our three design principles in
helping students engage with AI concepts and teachers facilitate student learning.
Additionally, based on these findings, we make design recommendations for future
curricula around our key design principles: active learning, embedded ethics, and
low barriers to access.
Active Learning
We used active learning to promote students’ understanding of and critical thinking
about technology as they were introduced to a new field. In this section we recommend designing activities and tools to support students constructing their understanding and using capstone projects to have students synthesize and share their
learning.
For all three curricula, we designed hands-on activities and tools to engage students in learning through discovery and construction (Bruner, 1961; Michael &
Modell, 2003). For example, in the “Introduction to Image Recognition” activity
from How to Train Your Robot workshop, after a brief explanation of neural networks, students dove into exploring the Quickdraw dataset and creating their own
image recognition models with Google’s Teachable Machine. With Teachable
Machine, students ran rapid trial-and-error experiments to better understand how
neural networks use features to learn classes. Corresponding with prior work on
active learning, we believed this approach would be successful because it allowed
students to ground their understanding of computationally complex ideas in realworld experience and reflection (Fortus, 2004). Indeed, we then saw that that most
students could correctly identify which features a neural network might use to distinguish the shapes of card suits in their assessment responses.
The biggest weakness of exploratory, trial-and-error activities is the difficulty
of guaranteeing that all students achieve all learning objectives (Bruner, 1961;
Michael, 2006). Some students will not explore materials thoroughly or they may
draw incorrect conclusions from their experiences. We saw examples of this, students misunderstanding key concepts, in every workshop. Again, in the How to
Train Your Robot “Introduction to Image Recognition” activity, we saw that a few
students developed the misconception that neural networks count shapes. Two
strategies that helped us address misunderstandings of concepts were 1) adding
scaffolding to students’ exploration and 2) using discussion to address key points.

13

362

International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education (2023) 33:325–383

Providing students with a guiding worksheet, like the one we used the “Strike
a Pose” activity in Dancing with AI, helps make sure that students encounter certain ideas (Fisher & Frey, 2013). Similarly, during discussion, facilitators can
address common misconceptions and critical ideas students should understand
(Long & Magerko, 2020). During the tool exploration in Creative AI, students
encountered AI generated Deepfakes, or hyper-realistic images and videos of people, and they believed them to be real. During in-class discussion we discussed
how those media can be generated by AI, and ways to identify Deepfakes. Students’ collective experience struggling to identify deepfakes led to a classroom
discussion that helped students uncover how Deepfakes could lead to the spread
of misinformation.
To support active learning, we designed rich computational environments,
or educational tools that were highly responsive to user input, to invite users to
inspect the mechanisms underlying AI algorithms (Lee et al., 2011; Resnick &
Rosenbaum, 2013). For example, in the Creative AI workshop, one of our handson activities included demos of GAN tools that generate images, text, and music.
The tools allowed students to enter their own input and control the degree to
which each generative algorithm transformed it. After this interactive exploration, we asked students to explain how generator and discriminator networks
functioned for live examples of GAN tools. After students’ interactions with
interactive GAN demos, most of them were able to infer what the generators were
generating and what kinds of datasets the tools had been trained on.
Design Recommendation 1: Active Learning
Support student learning and engagement through hands-on lessons and scaffolded learning environments.
(Bonwell & Eison, 1991; Bruner, 1961; Fortus, 2004; McConnell, 1996; Michael, 2006; Michael & Modell,
2003; Papert, 1980; Prince, 2005)

In every workshop, students completed open-ended projects to creatively apply
what they had learned. Projects gave students space to connect their learning to
personal interests (Design Consideration #12 from Long & Magerko, 2020) and
further develop their engineering identity. In Dancing with AI and How to Train
Your Robot, students completed capstone projects by the end of the week using
all the tools that they had learned. Students created everything from games to
applications that could help with chores. Doing projects led to learning that was
personal and relevant to students and their lives (Bell, 2010; Resnick & Robinson, 2017; Tsur & Rusk, 2018). Applications that could meet health needs were
also a theme we saw repeatedly in projects as the COVID-19 health pandemic
was front of mind for many students.
“You can see that with the level of conversations they were having and the
type of projects they were creating. You can tell it wasn’t just like ‘Hey I’m
going to create this surface level project’, they’re trying to look at ways of
actually applying to real world experiences. And I think that is one of the most

13

International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education (2023) 33:325–383

363

powerful takeaways they can get from any experience.” (Mr. Smith, Dancing
with AI)
Design Recommendation 2: Projects
Encourage students to create personally meaningful projects and share them with their community, especially
when working with communities that have limited exposure to AI.
(Bell S. , 2010; Resnick & Robinson, 2017; Tsur & Rusk, 2018)

A key opportunity in including project-based learning in AI education is that students will develop projects that imagine new uses for AI. Children in general are
underrepresented as inventors of AI systems, though their experiences lend a unique
perspective to what they create with AI. In their projects we saw that the most frequent beneficiaries of students’ creations were themselves, other kids, friends and
families, and their communities. We believe that it is important for students to
work on and share these projects to raise awareness of AI in their communities. On
the last day, students created videos and presentations to reflect on what they had
learned. Then, students shared some of their work in a showcase where they invited
their friends and family.
Embedded Ethics
Embedding ethics into our curricula created an opportunity for students to develop a
critical lens through which they can design and interact with future examples of AI.
In this section, we recommend making ethical issues visible in AI lessons and teaching ethical design practices to students.
Consumers and creators of AI must be able to foresee both positive and negative consequences to make informed decisions about the future of the technology.
The effectiveness of embedding ethics in AI lessons is demonstrated by students’
ability to reflect on AI’s capabilities, rooted in their understanding of how it works,
to imagine possible repercussions for society. In Dancing with AI, we talked to students about ethical concerns in the supervised machine learning systems that do face
classification.
Then, in the “Guess the Training Data” activity, students identified potential
flaws in hypothetical datasets and considered the larger societal implications of
using the systems in society. For example, a dataset that contains a gender bias
for occupations could be used in an AI system that unintentionally discriminates against people or offends them by perpetuating a stereotype. In Creative
AI, students could both identify the dataset used in GAN tools and imagine
potentially beneficial and harmful uses of the tools. In the “Explore GANs”
activity, students identified 100 beneficial uses and 85 harmful uses of different
GAN tools. For example, they saw very interactive, artistic tools like AI Duet
potentially being used as a rousing muse for an artist or a way to make lots of
annoying, unoriginal songs very quickly. When students learn ethics throughout

13

364

International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education (2023) 33:325–383

an AI course, they learn to think about the technology more holistically than if
they had just learned technical concepts (Skirpan et al., 2018).
Design Recommendation 3: Embed Ethics
To reinforce students’ understanding of the implications of AI technology, present ethical considerations along
with each technical concept and have students consider ethics in their projects.
(DiPaola, Payne, & Breazeal, 2020; Fiesler, Garrett, & Beard, 2020; Payne, 2020; Saltz, et al., 2019; Skirpan,
Beard, Bhaduri, Fiesler, & Yeh, 2018)

When students learn about the societal implications of technologies they are also
empowered as creators of AI (Ali et al., 2019). Students’ projects were a powerful metric to evaluate the extent to which students’ ethical knowledge transferred to
topics not explicitly covered in the lessons. In previous work, we saw that tools for
ethical analysis enabled students to critique and then redesign AI systems (DiPaola
et al., 2020; Payne, 2020). In these workshops, students went one step further by
designing, building, and iterating on AI systems. In Dancing with AI and How to
Train Your Robot, students demonstrated their ability to identify stakeholders and
their prominent interests regarding the design of systems. We saw students’ understanding of stakeholders’ needs expressed through their project implementations.
For example, a 12-year-old student in Dancing with AI who designed an application
to recognize if someone’s mask was safe or not had “Ease to use” and “Safety among
others” as two values in their ethical matrix. They realized that different people, like
civilians versus healthcare workers, might have different priorities for these two factors. In their project design, they accounted for this fact by saying that a mask might
be the “Best” or just “Good” depending on who the user was.
A challenge we faced in embedding ethics, particularly in students’ projects, was
helping students build empathy with stakeholders outside of their social circle. For
example, a student in How to Train Your Robot completed a project to feed homeless
individuals but struggled to empathize with the concerns of a person in that situation. To support students in building their capacity for empathy in design, we propose adding opportunities for students to learn more about and communicate with
their user groups. We propose giving students and instructors more time to explore
their ideas. Given sufficient time to research and iterate on project designs, students
can more deeply explore how ethical considerations can inform their projects in the
design, development, and evaluation phases of the creation process.
Low Barriers to Access
In designing our curricula, we sought to make affordable curricula that would be
approachable for students with a broad range of Computer Science backgrounds. We
recommend lowering barriers to access AI education by designing lessons to accommodate differences in students’ background knowledge and utilizing powerful, but
inexpensive technological tools.

13

International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education (2023) 33:325–383

365

In programming platforms that support novices, materials like step-by-step
instructions and tutorials give users access to just-in-time support as they learn
(Rusk, 2019). Similarly, we used leveled materials in the Dancing with AI curriculum and tutorial videos in the How to Train Your Robot curriculum. Our programming tools started with very simple guided activities then gradually gave students
more control. Lee et al. (2011) proposed a framework called Use-Modify-Create for
computational thinking where students first explore an already fully programmed
artifact, then they can modify parameters of the artifact, and finally students create
their own artifact. An example of this progression can be seen in the Dancing with
AI workshop where students moved from demoing existing interactive tools to modifying Scratch examples provided by the instructors to creating their own interactive,
AI-enabled programs. This progression allowed students, many of whom were new
to computer science, to build their own interactive AI system in just a week. To
account for learners with different technical expertise, we used small groups to cluster students by interests and skill levels. In this help-seeking framework, we encouraged students to rely on their peer community, asking and answering one another’s
questions, rather than always looking to the teacher.
Knowing that a lack of resources can potentially limit access to AI education,
we made all our workshop activities and tools available for free. We intentionally
made our resources available online so that teachers in our study could continue to
use them in their classrooms. Our tools are web-first and use minimal data, though
they do require initial access to the Internet to load. Even with these considerations,
our curricula were not completely accessible. Each robot from the How to Train
Your Robot curriculum cost $40 and teachers felt they would have to leave that part
behind because it was too expensive. Also, students with slower Internet connections had difficulty completing activities and participating in the synchronous online
workshop. Beyond our specific workshop context where all our participants at least
had Chromebooks, one-to-one devices are not available for students in every part of
the United States much less the rest of the world (Reisdorf et al., 2019). We propose
making future AI education even more accessible by developing platforms that work
on all kinds of devices, including older computers, mobile devices, and community
computers.
Design Recommendation 4: Mind the Digital Gap
Provide opportunities to program but reduce the barrier to entry by minimizing the prerequisite knowledge and
technology resources students need to participate in them.
(Lee, et al., 2011; Reisdorf, Yankelevich, Shapiro, & Dutton, 2019; Rusk, 2019)

In addition to designing for multiple devices, curriculum designers should
also consider creating unplugged alternatives to provide teachers more flexibility.
Unplugged or, in the online learning environment, non-programming activities
should be used throughout AI curricula to provide straight forward, engaging introductions to concepts (Fisher & Frey, 2013; Bell et al., 2009). In classrooms with
different capabilities to provide plugged experiences, unplugged activities can be
helpful alternatives. We would caution against designing fully unplugged curricula

13

366

International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education (2023) 33:325–383

for classrooms just because they have fewer resources—this could exacerbate existing educational inequalities. Rather, we encourage curriculum designers and implementers to strike a balance between unplugged and plugged materials for all students. We used both kinds of activities in our curricula to help students obtain a
complete picture of AI concepts (Bell et al., 2009).
Design Recommendation 5: Unplugged Activities
Integrate unplugged activities to make AI concepts more digestible for students and teachers.
(Bell, Alexander, Freeman, & Grimley, 2009; Payne, 2020; TechGirlz, 2018)

Unplugged activities were effective in conveying ideas in machine learning to students.
Today, state-of-the-art GAN creation requires days of training on a normal computer or
several hours on a powerful Graphical Processing Unit (GPU), meaning it was not possible for students to have direct experience training GANs. Instead, Creative AI’s “Generator vs. Discriminator” activity, students train GANs by using themselves as proxies
for the network components. In the activity, students saw the interplay between the two
networks and why training GANs takes a long time. Their understanding of GANs was
later reflected in their ability to technically describe how real-world examples of GANs
worked. In the Dancing with AI workshop, students used unplugged activities like “Charades” to explore the kinds of features a neural network needs to recognize body poses by
comparing what a computer might do to their own way of thinking. Later, students could
articulate differences between image and pose models, using language about features.
An additional consideration for lowering the barrier to access is to make curricula
available in different languages. There exists a version of the How to Train Your
Robot platform in Spanish, but more work needs to be done to localize the platforms
and activity materials. The most effective translations go beyond words, they also
translate the sociocultural metaphors that we use to relate ideas to students. Future
research should explore co-designing AI platforms with teachers to translate ideas
and metaphors for students from diverse communities.

Conclusion
This paper describes how we designed and executed three project-based curricula
in an online learning environment to make AI education more accessible to middle
school students. There are some limitations to this work that reduce our ability to
generalize about how all middle school students would engage with our curricula.
First, there is the question of validating our assessments. There were not many validated summative assessments for middle school students available at the time of the
study. With more reliable summative assessments, we could draw stronger conclusions about how much students’ understanding of AI changed due to our workshops.
The tools that we used for formative assessment are our own, based on current understandings of AI topics in the field. More work should be done to validate these instruments, including using them on students who do not go through formal AI curricula.

13

International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education (2023) 33:325–383

367

Second, the total number of student participants was divided unevenly amongst three
workshops. Some of our results had very small sample sizes which limits the statistical power of our data. Finally, our participants were not randomly selected. We selected
teacher participants then teachers handpicked students, meaning the students in our sample might be especially motivated. There is value in replicating this work with randomly
selected classrooms to better understand students’ ability to learn AI.
Despite these limitations, we feel confident that the results of the three workshops
allow us to better understand effective strategies for teaching AI. The design principles that
undergird our curricula are active learning, embedded ethics, and low barriers to access.
We built these principles into our activities so that students could learn about technical and
ethical concepts related to AI and then apply their knowledge in personally meaningful
ways. Active learning approaches including hands-on, non-programming activities and
self-directed final projects helped students to not only grasp fundamental concepts, but to
build their own AI artifacts that benefit others in some way. Embedding ethics into the curricula facilitated students’ development of a critical perspective of AI such that they have
the skills to constructively reimagine the AI systems they encounter every day.
Lowering the technological and prior knowledge barriers to access meant that
more students, some who had never taken a computer science class before, could
experience engaging and relevant AI lessons. Student performance and feedback
on our three workshops provide strong encouragement that curricula created with
our design principles can help prepare and motivate students to become knowledgeable users and creators of AI. Additionally, the tools and lesson plans we created to
deliver AI lessons and train middle school teachers are freely available for others to
use and build on.

Appendix 1. Description of Creative AI Curriculum Activities
Workshop Wide Resources
• Website: https://​raise.​mit.​edu/​daily/​index.​html
• Teaching Resources: https://​raise.​mit.​edu/​daily/​teach​ingRe​sourc​es.​html

Day 1 Activities
Activity

Links

Time

Introduction to AI
Students learn about the three parts of Machine Learning and identify technologies that use AI

https://​raise.​mit.​edu/​daily/​whati​sai.​
html

30 min

https://​raise.​mit.​edu/​daily/​super​vised​
Classification with Teachable Machine
ML.​html
Students use Google’s Teachable Machine to create their own supervised machine learning models.
Students learn how the data that they put into a model
impacts the way the model works

60 min

13

368

International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education (2023) 33:325–383

Day 2 Activities
Activity

Links

Time

Colors Activity: Classification vs.
Generation
Students learn the difference between
algorithms that classify and algorithms
that generate, through an activity where
they classify and generate new colors

https://​raise.​mit.​edu/​daily/​class​VsGen.​html

60 min

https://​raise.​mit.​edu/​daily/​whatA​reGANs.​html#​
gansO​rNot

30 min

GANs or Not
Students are introduced to the concept of
GANs, or AI algorithms that generate
new media. They are given a slide deck
of different types of media asked to
determine whether it was generated by a
GAN or not

Day 3 Activities
Activity

Links

Time

How do GANs Work?
Students learn about the two networks that constitute
GANs – generator and discriminator. Through an
interactive activity, students learn how the generator
and discriminator work against each other to generate
new instances of synthetic data

https://​raise.​mit.​edu/​daily/​genVs​
Dis.​html

60 min

https://​raise.​mit.​edu/​daily/​aiArt.​html

60 min

Explore GANs
Students interact with web-based GAN tools to generate
four different kinds of data. Students brainstorm the
potential benefits and harms of using these generative
tools

Day 4 Activities
Activity

Links

Time

Creative with GANs: Style + Text Generation
Students use a visual art generation tool and
a text generative tool to generate a story.
Students share their stories with each other

https://​raise.​mit.​edu/​daily/​gener​ateSt​ory.​html

60 min

13

International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education (2023) 33:325–383

369

Activity

Links

Time

Deepfakes
Students learn about deepfakes (GAN generated faces and videos). Students discuss
the potential harms of deepfakes, and some
techniques to recognize them

https://​raise.​mit.​edu/​daily/​deepf​akes.​html

45 min

https://​raise.​mit.​edu/​daily/​envir​onmen​talIm​
Environmental Impact of AI
pacts.​html
Students learn about the carbon footprint of
large AI models and discuss ways to mitigate
the environmental impact of AI

15 min

Day 5 Activities
Activity

Links

Time

Misinformation generation and spread
Students play and interactive game that demonstrates
how misinformation spreads on social media networks. Students discuss how deepfakes may lead to
misinformation, how it can be harmful and ways to
mitigate misinformation

https://​raise.​mit.​edu/​daily/​misin​fo.​
html

60 min

https://​raise.​mit.​edu/​daily/​gener​ateSt​
ory.​html

30 min

Art Journal Showcase
Students share the concepts learned and media generated throughout the workshop with their friends and
families

Appendix 2. Description of Dancing with AI Curriculum Activities
Workshop Wide Resources
• Website: https://​danci​ngwit​hai.​media.​mit.​edu/
• Curriculum: https://​danci​ngwit​hai.​media.​mit.​edu/​curri​culum
• We aligned this curriculum with the 6-8th grade Computer Science Standards

created by the CSTA.17 A description of how the learning standards align with
the Dancing with AI curriculum can be found here: https://​tinyu​rl.​com/​dwai-​
stand​ards.

17

CSTA K-12 Computer Science Standards, https://​www.​cstea​chers.​org/​page/​stand​ards

13

370

International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education (2023) 33:325–383

Day 1 Activities
• Teacher scripts: https://​tinyu​rl.​com/​dwai-​day1s​cript
• Slides: https://​tinyu​rl.​com/​dwai-​day1s​lides
Activity

Links

Introductions
Students introduce themselves to their fellow
classmates and demonstrate a favorite movement that goes along with their name!

15 min

Introduction to Unit
Have students understand the context of this
workshop by having them name different
technologies that they know of that recognize
their movement (e.g., Snapchat, Kinect, Instagram games, etc.…)

Project Bazaar
Students travel to stations set up around the
room to check out different examples of projects that utilize their movement to produce
something interesting
Charades Activity
To introduce students to the concept of movement in AI, have them play charades and
observe the ‘features’ of each movement in
the game
CSTA Standards: 2-DA-07

Time

10 min

Slides: https://​tinyu​rl.​com/​dwai-​proje​ctbaz​aar 45 min

Cards: https://​tinyu​rl.​com/​dwai-​chara​des
20 min
Website: http://​movem​ent-​chara​des.​glitch.​me/

Worksheet: https://​tinyu​rl.​com/​dwai-​gttd
Examples of Classification in AI
Have students think critically about the three
parts of an AI system. After reviewing examples, have students fill out relevant worksheets
CSTA Standards: 2-AP-10

45 min

Wrap Up
Summarize and preview tomorrow’s lesson

10 min

13

International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education (2023) 33:325–383

371

Day 2 Activities
• Teacher scripts: https://​tinyu​rl.​com/​dwai-​day2s​cript
• Slides: https://​tinyu​rl.​com/​dwai-​day2s​lides
Activity

Links

Time

Learning Teachable Machines
Students learn how to create and use a Teachable Machines classifier
CSTA Standards: 2-DA-08, 2-DA-09

20 min

Image vs. Pose Recognition
Students use Teachable Machine classifiers to
understand the differences between images
and poses as a form of representation
CSTA Standards: 2-DA-07

Worksheet: https://​tinyu​rl.​com/​dwai-​strik​
eapose

40 min

Ethics of Data Representation
Class discussion where students reflect on
the ethics of different types of representation, learn about bias, and think about data
privacy
CSTA Standards: 2-IC20, 2-IC-21, 2-IC-23

Video: https://​www.​ted.​com/​talks/​joy_​buola​
mwini_​how_i_​m_​fight​ing_​bias_​in_​algor​
ithms

30 min

Brainstorming Session!
Instructor goes through Scratch projects with
students to help them generate ideas for their
own project. Afterwards, students reflect in
their journals about what type of project they
would want to make
CSTA Standards: 2-CS-01, 2-AP-15

45 min

Wrap-up
Summarize and preview tomorrow’s lesson

10 min

13

372

International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education (2023) 33:325–383

Day 3 Activities
• Teacher scripts: https://​tinyu​rl.​com/​dwai-​day3s​cript
• Slides: https://​tinyu​rl.​com/​dwai-​day3s​lides
Activity

Links

Introduction to Natural Interaction and AI
Students learn about the different ways in which
humans interact with each other and reflect on how
we can interact with AI systems

Coding Interactive AI Systems
Students are introduced to the body/hand/face sensing
PoseBlocks and create their own mini projects
CSTA Standards: 2-AP-15

Wrap-up
Summarize and preview tomorrow’s lesson

Time
45 min

Warm-up: https://​tinyu​rl.​com/​dwai-​
sensi​ngwar​mup
Tutorial: https://​tinyu​rl.​com/​dwai-​
scrat​chtut​orial
Scaffolding: https://​tinyu​rl.​com/​dwai-​
codin​gcards

75 min

10 min

Day 4 Activities
• Teacher scripts: https://​tinyu​rl.​com/​dwai-​day4s​cript
• Slides: https://​tinyu​rl.​com/​dwai-​day4s​lides
Activity

Links

Time

Using Teachable Machine blocks
Students learn how to import the Teachable
Machine models they create into Scratch to
use them in projects
CSTA Standards: 2-DA-09, 2-AP-17

Warm-up: https://​tinyu​rl.​com/​dwai-​event​
swarm​up
Guide: https://​tinyu​rl.​com/​dwai-​tmgui​de

45 min

Ethical matrix activity
Students learn how to use an ethical matrix
to structure their project brainstorming for
computational action
CSTA Standards: 2-IC-20

Template: https://​tinyu​rl.​com/​dwai-​ethic​almat​
rix

45 min

Final project work
Students begin work on their final projects
using their choice of the body/hand/face
sensing blocks or the Teachable Machine
blocks
CSTA Standards: 2-AP-15, 2-AP-17

Brainstorming example: https://​padlet.​com/​
bcjor​danmit/​4immw​hdtb2​2w46y3

45 min

Wrap-up
Summarize and preview tomorrow’s lesson

13

10 min

International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education (2023) 33:325–383

373

Day 5 Activities
• Teacher scripts: https://​tinyu​rl.​com/​dwai-​day5s​cript
• Slides: https://​tinyu​rl.​com/​dwai-​day5s​lides
Activity

Links

Final project work
Students continue work on their final projects using their
choice of the body/hand/face sensing blocks or the Teachable Machine blocks
CSTA Standards: 2-AP-15, 2-AP-17

Brainstorming example: https://​ 45 min
padlet.​com/​bcjor​danmit/​
4immw​hdtb2​2w46y3

Final project presentations
Students demo their projects to the class and share what they
have learned in the workshop

75 min

Wrap-up
Thank students for their participation in the workshop!

Time

Example participation certificate: https://​tinyu​rl.​com/​dwai-​
parti​cipat​ionce​rt

10 min

Appendix 3. Description of How to Train Your Robot Curriculum
Activities
Workshop Wide Resources
• Website: http://​httyr.​media.​mit.​edu/
• Teacher guide: https://​tinyu​rl.​com/​httyr-​curri​culum/
• We aligned this curriculum with the 6-8th grade Computer Science Standards

created by the CSTA18 and the Common Core English Language Arts/Literacy
and Mathematics Standards.19

18
19

CSTA K-12 Computer Science Standards, https://​www.​cstea​chers.​org/​page/​stand​ards
Common Core Standards, http://​www.​cores​tanda​rds.​org/​read-​the-​stand​ards/

13

374

International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education (2023) 33:325–383

Day 1 Activities
• Teacher guide: https://​tinyu​rl.​com/​httyr-​day1g​uide
• Slides: https://​tinyu​rl.​com/​httry-​day1s​lides
Activity
Welcome
Students introduce themselves and play a game
of “Would You Rather?” to set the stage for
design decision-making in AI

Links

Time
15 min

What is AI?
Students discuss examples of technology in
their lives and develop a definition of AI.
They then play a game to reason about
whether different examples of technology
use AI or not
Common Core Standards: W.1
CSTA Standards: 2-IC-20

AI or Not Cards: https://​tinyu​rl.​com/​httyr-​
day1a​iornot

45 min

Ethical Dilemmas
Students learn about ethics from a BrainPOP
video and practice ethical decision-making
examples
Common Core Standards: RI.6, W.1

Video: https://​www.​youtu​be.​com/​watch?v=​
zPsoF​hUDLuU

30 min

Introduction to AI Blocks
Students do mini programming activities to
refresh their knowledge of programming
and to get to know their robots
CSTA Standards: 2-CS-02, 2-AP-12

45 min
Programming Platform: https://​mitme​dialab.​
github.​io/​prg-​exten​sion-​boile​rplate/​robot​afe
Programming Tutorial: https://​httyr.​media.​mit.​
edu/​tutor​ials#h.​i0xjh​mp3n6​ld

Day 2 Activities
• Teacher guide: https://​tinyu​rl.​com/​httyr-​day2g​uide
• Slides: https://​tinyu​rl.​com/​httyr-​day2s​lides
Activity

Links

Time

Alexa Pizza Delivery App
Students learn the basics of what algorithms
are then design an algorithm for a voice
assistant skill that recommends pizza to
users
CSTA Standards: 2-AP-10

Pizza Delivery App Spreadsheet: https://​tinyu​
rl.​com/​httyr-​day2p​izza

40 min

13

International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education (2023) 33:325–383

375

Activity

Links

Time

Image Classification
Students learn the basic components of neural
networks and how to curate training and
testing datasets using Google’s Teachable
Machine
CSTA Standards: 2-DA-08, 2-DA-09

Google’s Teachable Machine: https://​teach​
ablem​achine.​withg​oogle.​com/​train/​image

20 min

Algorithmic Bias Discussion
Students explore real-world examples of
algorithmic bias to understand more about
the potential impact of AI systems
Common Core Standards: RI.7, RI.9, SL.1,
SL.2
CSTA Standards: 2-IC-21

Algorithm Bias Resources –
Gender Shades Explanation, Joy Buolamwini
et al.: https://​www.​youtu​be.​com/​watch?v=​
TWWsW​1w-​BVo
“AI Ain’t I A Woman?”, Joy Buolamwini:
https://​www.​youtu​be.​com/​watch?v=​Qxuyf​
WoVV98
Machine Leaning and Human Bias, Google:
https://​www.​youtu​be.​com/​watch?v=​59bMh​
59JQDo
How to Deal With a (Seemingly) Racist Computer: https://​tinyu​rl.​com/​httyr-​day2a​rticle

25 min

Teachable Machine and AI Blocks
Students train image recognition models and
use them to create applications and control
robots
CSTA Standards: 2-CS-02

45 min
Programming Platform: https://​mitme​dialab.​
github.​io/​prg-​exten​sion-​boile​rplate/​robot​afe
Programming Tutorial: https://​httyr.​media.​mit.​
edu/​tutor​ials#h.​lusy9​nsima​ln

Day 3 Activities
• Teacher guide: https://​tinyu​rl.​com/​httyr-​day3g​uide
• Slides: https://​tinyu​rl.​com/​httyr-​day3s​lides
Activity

Links

Time

Explanation of Smart Speakers: https://​www.​
Ethical Matrix: Redesign Alexa
youtu​be.​com/​watch?v=​o4A3M​iLsNJc
Students use modified versions of an ethical
matrix to conduct stakeholder analysis and
unpack the implications of design on various
groups. They use an ethical matrix to design
a new voice assistant for schools
Common Core Standards: RI.6
CSTA Standards: 2-CS-01

40 min

Text Classification
Students learn the basics of the K Nearest
Neighbors algorithm and how it can be used
to classify text

20 min

13

376

International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education (2023) 33:325–383

Activity

Links

Time

Exploring Word Analogies
Students use an interactive tool to learn about
how word vectors represent language.
Students explore bias in large, pretrained
datasets and how to mitigate the effects of
such bias
CSTA Standards: 2-DA-09, 2-IC-21

25 min
Explore Word Analogies Tool, J. Bazinska
and P. Migdal: https://​mitme​dialab.​github.​io/​
ardui​no-​scrat​ch2/​word2​viz-​master/

Text Classification and AI Blocks
Students train text classification models and
use them to create applications and control
robots
CSTA Standards: 2-CS-02

45 min
Programming Platform: https://​mitme​dialab.​
github.​io/​prg-​exten​sion-​boile​rplate/​robot​afe
Programming Tutorial: https://​httyr.​media.​mit.​
edu/​tutor​ials#h.​7kaap​o7qg4​qv

Day 4 Activities
• Teacher guide: https://​tinyu​rl.​com/​httyr-​day4g​uide
• Slides: https://​tinyu​rl.​com/​httyr-​day4s​lides
Activity

Links

Brainstorming Worksheet: https://​tinyu​rl.​
Final Project Brainstorming
com/​httyr-​day4b​rains​torm
Students collaboratively generate ideas for
final projects that leverage what they learned
during the week

Planning Worksheet: https://​tinyu​rl.​com/​
Final Project Planning
httyr-​day4p​lan
Students plan the ethical design considerations
and technical components they will use in
their final projects

Final Project Work Time
Students begin working on their open-ended
projects
CSTA Standards: 2-CS-02, 2-AP-12, 2-AP-13,
2-AP-15, 2-AP-17, 2-AP-18

13

Programming Platform: https://​mitme​dialab.​
github.​io/​prg-​exten​sion-​boile​rplate/​robot​
afe

Time
15 min

15 min

105 min

International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education (2023) 33:325–383

377

Day 5 Activities
• Teacher guide: https://​tinyu​rl.​com/​httyr-​day5g​uide
• Slides: https://​tinyu​rl.​com/​httyr-​day5s​lides
Activity

Links

Time

Final Project Work Time
Students wrap up their final projects
and create presentations to share
their work
CSTA Standards: 2-CS-02, 2-AP12, 2-AP-13, 2-AP-15, 2-AP-17,
2-AP-18

Programming Platform: https://​mitme​dialab.​github.​io/​
prg-​exten​sion-​boile​rplate/​robot​afe
Final Project Slide Template: https://​tinyu​rl.​com/​httyr-​
day5s​lide

90 min

Class Showcase
Students present their final projects to
a general audience of their family
and friends
Common Core Standards: SL.4

45 min

Appendix 4. Prior Experience Questionnaire
Question

Answer Options

Have you heard of AI before? (Creative, HTTYR)

• Yes
• No
• Not sure

Which of these pieces of technology have you
used before?

YouTube, Google Search, Twitter, Email, Amazon
Alexa, Netflix, Facebook, Snapchat, Spotify, Cortana, Google Home, Instagram, Lego Mindstorms,
Cozmo robot, Tablet, Scratch, Gaming System,
TikTok

On a scale of 1 to 5, how much is technology a
part of your life? (HTTYR)

• Not at all (1)
• Quite a lot (5)

13

378

International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education (2023) 33:325–383

Appendix 5. AI Perception Questionnaire
Question

Answer Options

How would you describe AI to your friends?

Open ended

Select all of the words that you think describe AI:

Creative, Intelligent, Funny,
Original, Fair, Unfair, Collaborative, Tool, Helpful, Harmful,
Exciting, Scary

Which of these do you agree with?

• AI will take over jobs
• AI will make jobs easier

Which of these do you think AI can do?

• Find the square root of pi
• Recognize your face
• Create music
• Bake a cake
• Style your hair
• Make a painting
• Hit a baseball

Do you think that the following technologies have Artificial Intelligence? (HTTYR)

Google Search, Printer, Video
Call App, Game Consoles,
YouTube, Voice Assistants,
System, TikTok

Appendix 6. Self Perception Questionnaire
Question

Answer Options

How much do the following statements describe you?
• I want to work with computers and technology
• I usually find computers and technology confusing
• I don’t know a lot about computers and technology
• I like to learn about computers and technology
• Some of my friends or family work with computers or technology
• I would not like a job with computers and technology
• I am good with computers and technology

• Not at all (1)
• Not really (2)
• Unsure (3)
• Somewhat (4)
• Quite a lot (5)

Which of the following do you agree with the most?

• AI is smarter than me
• AI and I are equally smart
• I am smarter than AI

Which of these do you agree with?

• I can control AI
• AI has a mind of its own
• Both
• Neither

Which of these do you agree with?

• AI can help me make things
• I can help AI make things
• Both
• Neither

13

International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education (2023) 33:325–383

379

Acknowledgements This work would not have been possible without the teachers, students, and their
families who participated in the workshops. This work was supported by grants from Amazon Future
Engineer, National Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship Program no. 1745302, and the
LEGO Foundation. We are also grateful to I2 Learning, the MIT STEP Lab, and our research interns
Tejal Reddy, Victor Sindato, Grace Kim, and Ryan Blumofe for their contributions to the development
and instruction of the summer workshops.
Author Contributions Randi Williams, Safinah Ali, Nisha Devasia, Daniella DiPaola, Jenna Hong, Brian
Jordan, and Cynthia Breazeal contributed to the study conception, design, material preparation, and
data collection of the curricula. Data analysis was performed by Randi Williams, Safinah Ali, Daniella
DiPaola, Nisha Devasia, and Jenna Hong. Randi Williams, Safinah Ali, Nisha Devasia, Daniella DiPaola,
Jenna Hong, Stephen P. Kaputsos, and Cynthia Breazeal contributed to the writing of the first draft of the
manuscript and revising subsequent versions. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Funding Open Access funding provided by the MIT Libraries This work was supported by grants from
Amazon Future Engineer, National Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship Program no.
1745302, and the LEGO Foundation.
Code Availability The materials presented in this work and associated code can be found on the respective websites for each curriculum: Creative AI (https://​raise.​mit.​edu/​daily/​index.​html), Dancing with AI
(https://​danci​ngwit​hai.​media.​mit.​edu), and How to Train Your Robot (https://​httyr.​media.​mit.​edu).

Declarations
Ethics Approval The work presented in this paper was approved by MIT’s Committee on the Use of
Humans as Experimental Subjects (COUHES) under approvals no. 1904808126, no. 2006000190, and
no. 1912000072.
Consent to Participate and Publish All participants, and the parents of participants who are minors,
provided written informed consent prior to enrollment in the study. Although participant information is
anonymized, we also requested and received permission from participants and the parents of participants
who are minors, to publish this work.
Competing Interests The authors have no relevant financial or non-financial interests to disclose.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License,
which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as
you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article
are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the
material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is
not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission
directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://​creat​iveco​mmons.​org/​licen​
ses/​by/4.​0/.

References
AAAI. (2020). Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence Homepage. Retrieved from
AAAI: https://​www.​aaai.​org/
Ali, S., DiPaola, D., Lee, I., Sindato, V., Kim, G., Blumofe, R., & Breazeal, C. (2021b). Children as creators, thinkers and citizens in an AI-driven future. Computers and Education: Artificial Intelligence,
2, 100040–100051.

13

380

International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education (2023) 33:325–383

Ali, S., Payne, B., Williams, R., Park, H. W., & Breazeal, C. (2019). Constructionism, ethics, and creativity: Developing primary and middle school artificial intelligence education. International Workshop
on Education in Artificial Intelligence K-12 (EDUAI’19), 1–4.
Ali, S., Park, H. W., & Breazeal, C. (2021). A social robot’s influence on children’s figural creativity during gameplay. International Journal of Child-Computer Interaction, 28.
Ali, S., DiPaola, D., Lee, I., Hong, J., & Breazeal, C. (2021a). Exploring Generative Models with Middle
School Students. CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ‘21).
Bau, D., Strobelt, H., Peebles, W., Wulff, J., Zhou, B., Zhu, J.-Y., & Torralba, A. (2019). Semantic photo
manipulation with a generative image prior. ACM Transactions on Graphics, 38, (4), 1–11.
Bell, S. (2010). Project-based learning for the 21st century: Skills for the future. The Clearing House, 83,
39–43.
Bell, T., Alexander, J., Freeman, I., & Grimley, M. (2009). Computer science unplugged: School students doing real computing without computers. The New Zealand Journal of Applied Computing
and Information Technology, 13, 20–29.
Bonwell, C. C., & Eison, J. A. (1991). Active learning: Creating excitement in the classroom. ERIC.
Boulais, O., Groh, M., & Epstein, Z. (2020). Ganimals: The Underwater Sea Creatures of Our Computational Dreams. Ocean Sciences Meeting 2020. Retrieved from
Bruner, J. S. (1961). The act of discovery. Harvard Educational Review, 31, 21–32. https://​agu.​confex.​
com/​agu/​osm20/​preli​minar​yview.​cgi/​Paper​641132.​html
Buolamwini, J., & Gebru, T. (2018). Gender shades: Intersectional accuracy disparities in commercial
gender classification. Conference on Fairness, Accountability and Transparency, (pp. 77–91).
Carney, M., Webster, B., Alvarado, I., Phillips, K., Howell, N., Griffith, J., . . . Chen, A. (2020, 4). Teachable Machine: Approachable Web-Based Tool for Exploring Machine Learning Classification.
Extended Abstracts of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (pp.
1–8). New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery.
De La Higuera, C. (2019). A preliminary report about Teaching and Learning Artificial Intelligence:
Overview of key issues. A preliminary report about Teaching and Learning Artificial Intelligence:
Overview of key issues. Document inédit.
DiPaola, D., Payne, B. H., & Breazeal, C. (2020). Decoding design agendas: an ethical design activity for
middle school students. Proceedings of the Interaction Design and Children Conference, (pp. 1–10).
DiPaola, D., Ali, S., & Breazeal, C. (2021). What are GANs?: Introducing Generative Adversarial Networks to Middle School Students. Proceedings of the 11th Symposium on Education Advances in
Artificial Intelligence (EAAI ‘21).
Druga, S. (2018). Growing up with AI : Cognimates : from coding to teaching machines. Massachusetts
Institute of Technology.
Eubanks, V. (2018). Automating inequality: How high-tech tools profile, police, and punish the poor.
Martin’s Press.
Fiesler, C., Garrett, N., & Beard, N. (2020). What Do We Teach When We Teach Tech Ethics? A Syllabi
Analysis. Proceedings of the 51st ACM Technical Symposium on Computer Science Education, (pp.
289–295).
Fisher, D., & Frey, N. (2013). Better learning through structured teaching: A framework for the gradual
release of responsibility. ASCD.
Fortus, D., Dershimer, R. C., Krajcik, J., Marx, R. W., & Mamlok‐Naaman, R. (2004). Design‐based science and student learning. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 41(10), 1081–1110.
García, J. D., Moreno-León, J., Román-González, M., & Robles, G. (2020). LearningML: A tool to foster
computational thinking skills through practical artificial intelligence projects. Revista de Educación
a Distancia, 20(63), 7.
Goodfellow, I., Pouget-Abadie, J., Mirza, M., Xu, B., Warde-Farley, D., Ozair, S., . . . Bengio, Y. (2014).
Generative adversarial nets. Advances in neural information processing systems, 2672–2680.
Ha, D., & Eck, D. (2018). A neural representation of sketch drawings. International Conference on
Learning Representations. https://​magic-​sketc​hpad.​glitch.​me/
Harvey, B., Garcia, D. D., Barnes, T., Titterton, N., Armendariz, D., Segars, L., & Paley, J. (2013). Snap!
(build your own blocks). Proceeding of the 44th ACM technical symposium on Computer science
education (pp. 759–759).
Hitron, T., Wald, I., Erel, H., & Zuckerman, O. (2018). Introducing children to machine learning concepts
through hands-on experience. Proceedings of the 17th ACM Conference on Interaction Design and
Children, (pp. 563–568).

13

International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education (2023) 33:325–383

381

Isola, P., Zhu, J.-Y. Z., & Efros, A. A. (2017). Image-to-image translation with conditional adversarial networks. Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
1124–1134.
Jordan, B., Devasia, N., Hong, J., Williams, R., & Breazeal, C. (2021). PoseBlocks: A Toolkit for Creating (and Dancing) with AI. Proceedings of the 11th Symposium on Education Advances in Artificial
Intelligence (EAAI ‘21).
Kafai, Y. B. (1995). Minds in play: Computer game design as a context for children’s learning. Routledge.
Kandlhofer, M., Steinbauer, G., Hirschmugl-Gaisch, S., & Huber, P. (2019). Artificial intelligence and
computer science in education: From kindergarten to university. IEEE Frontiers in Education Conference (FIE), 2016, 1–9.
Karras, T., Laine, S., & Aila, T. (2019). A style-based generator architecture for generative adversarial
networks. Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, 4401–
4410. https://​exper​iments.​withg​oogle.​com/​ai/​ai-​duet/​view/
Kolodner, J. L., Camp, P. J., Crismond, D., Fasse, B., Gray, J., Holbrook, J., . . . Ryan, M. (2003). Problem-based learning meets case-based reasoning in the middle-school science classroom: Putting
learning by design into practice. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 12(4), 495–547.
Koski, M.-I., Kurhila, J., & Pasanen, T. A. (2008). Why using robots to teach computer science can be
successful theoretical reflection to andragogy and minimalism. Proceedings of the 8th International
Conference on Computing Education Research, (pp. 32–40).
Kumar, A. N. (2004). Three years of using robots in an artificial intelligence course: Lessons learned.
Journal on Educational Resources in Computing (JERIC), 4, 2.
Kuo, L. (2018). World’s first AI news anchor unveiled in China. The Guardian: China. Retrieved from
https://​www.​thegu​ardian.​com/​world/​2018/​nov/​09/​worlds-​first-​ai-​news-​anchor-​unvei​led-​in-​china
Lao, N. (2020). Reorienting Machine Learning Education Towards Tinkerers and ML-Engaged Citizens.
Ph.D. dissertation, Ph.D. Dissertation. Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Lassnig, J. P. (2018). Development of a curriculum to teach basics of artificial intelligence. Graz University of Technology.
Lee, I., Martin, F., Denner, J., Coulter, B., Allan, W., Erickson, J., . . . Werner, L. (2011). Computational
thinking for youth in practice. ACM Inroads, 32–37.
Lee, I., Ali, S., Zhang, H., DiPaola, D., & Breazeal, C. (2021). Developing Middle School Students’
AI Literacy. Proceedings of the 52nd ACM Technical Symposium on Computer Science Education,
191–197.
Leopold, T. A., Ratcheva, V., & Zahidi, S. (2018). The future of jobs report 2018. World Economic
Forum. Retrieved from https://​www3.​wefor​um.​org/​docs/​WEF_​Future_​of_​Jobs_​2018.​pdf
Long, D., & Magerko, B. (2020). What is AI Literacy? Competencies and Design Considerations. Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (pp. 1–16). New
York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery.
Marques, L. S., Gresse von Wangenheim, C., & Hauck, J. C. (2020). Teaching Machine Learning in
School: A Systematic Mapping of the State of the Art. Informatics in Education, 19, 283–321.
McConnell, J. J. (1996). Active learning and its use in computer science. Proceedings of the 1st conference on Integrating technology into computer science education, (pp. 52–54).
Michael, J., & Modell, H. I. (2003). Active learning in secondary and college science classrooms: A
working model for helping the learner to learn. Routledge.
Michael, J. (2006). Where’s the evidence that active learning works? Advances in physiology education,
30(4), 159–167.
National Council of Supervisors of Mathematics. (2013). Improving Student Achievement in Mathematics by Using Manipulatives with Classroom Instruction. Position Papers: Improving Student
Achievement.
Nguyen, T. T., Nguyen, C. M., Nguyen, D. T., Nguyen, D. T., & Nahavandi, S. (2019). Deep learning
for deepfakes creation and detection. arXiv preprint arXiv:​1909.​11573.
Noble, S. U. (2018). Algorithms of oppression: How search engines reinforce racism. New York University Press.
O’Neil, C. (2016). Weapons of math destruction: How big data increases inequality and threatens
democracy. Broadway Books.
Opel, S., Schlichtig, M., Schulte, C., Biehler, R., Frischemeier, D., Podworny, S., & Wassong, T.
(2019). Entwicklung und Reflexion einer Unterrichtssequenz zum Maschinellen Lernen als
Aspekt von Data Science in der Sekundarstufe II. INFOS, 288, 285–294.
Papert, S. (1980). Mindstorms: Children, computers, and powerful ideas. Basic Books, Inc.

13

382

International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education (2023) 33:325–383

Payne, B. H. (2020). Can my algorithm be my opinion?: An AI + Ethics Curriculum for Middle School
Students. Master’s thesis, Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Prince, M. (2005). Does active learning work? A review of the research. Journal of Engineering Education, 93(9), 223–231.
Reddy, T., Williams, R., & Breazeal, C. (2021). Text Classification for AI Education. ACM Technical
Symposium on Computer Science Education.
Register, Y., & Ko, A. J. (2020). Learning machine learning with personal data helps stakeholders
ground advocacy arguments in model mechanics. Proceedings of the 2020 ACM Conference on
International Computing Education Research, 67–78.
Reisdorf, B. C., Yankelevich, A., Shapiro, M., & Dutton, W. H. (2019). Wirelessly bridging the homework gap: Technical options and social challenges in getting broadband to disconnected students.
Education and Information Technologies, 24, 3803–3821.
Resnick, M., & Rosenbaum, E. (2013). Designing for tinkerability. In M. Honey, & D. E. Kanter
(Eds.), Design, make, play (pp. 181–199). Routledge.
Resnick, M., Maloney, J., Monroy-Hernández, A., Rusk, N., Eastmond, E., Brennan, K., . . . Kafai, Y.
(2009, 11). Scratch: programming for all. Commun. ACM, 52, 60–67.
Resnick, M., & Robinson, K. (2017). Lifelong Kindergarten: Cultivating creativity through projects,
passion, peers, and play. MIT Press.
Rusk, N. (2019). Scratch 3.0 Coding Cards. No Starch Press, Incorporated.
Saltz, J., Skirpan, M., Fiesler, C., Gorelick, M., Yeh, T., Heckman, R., . . . Beard, N. (2019). Integrating ethics within machine learning courses. Transactions on Computing Education, 1–26.
Shen, H., Deng, H. W., Chattopadhyay, A., Wu, Z. S., Wang, X., & Zhu, H. (2021). Value cards: An
educational toolkit for teaching social impacts of machine learning through deliberation. ACM
Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency, 850–861.
Skirpan, M., Beard, N., Bhaduri, S., Fiesler, C., & Yeh, T. (2018). Ethics Education in Context: A
Case Study of Novel Ethics Activities for the CS Classroom. Proceedings of the 49th ACM Technical Symposium on Computer Science Education, (pp. 940–945).
Smilkov, D., Thorat, N., Assogba, Y., Yuan, A., Kreeger, N., Yu, P., Cai, S., Nielsen, E., Soegel, D.,
Bileschi, S., Terry, M., Yuan, A., Zhang, K., Gupta, S., Sirajuddin, S., Sculley, D., Monga, R.,
Corrado, G., Viegas, F., & Wattenberg, M. (2019). Tensorflow. js: Machine learning for the web
and beyond. Proceedings of Machine Learning and Systems, 1, 309–321.
Solomon, C., Harvey, B., Kahn, K., Lieberman, H., Miller, M. L., Minsky, M., . . . Silverman, B.
(2020). History of Logo. Proceedings of the ACM on Programming Languages, 4, 1–66.
Talaga, P., & Oh, J. C. (2009). Combining AIMA and LEGO mindstorms in an artificial intelligence
course to build real world robots. Journal of Computing Sciences in Colleges, 24, 56–64.
Tang, D. (2019). Empowering novices to understand and use machine learning with personalized
image classification models, intuitive analysis tools, and MIT App Inventor. Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
TechGirlz. (2018). A Look Inside The Human Neural Network Activity From Our `Artificial Intelligence: How Computers Learn’ TechShop. A Look Inside The Human Neural Network Activity From Our `Artificial Intelligence: How Computers Learn’ TechShop. Retrieved from https://​
www.​t echg​i rlz.​o rg/a-​l ook-​i nside-​t he-​h uman-​n eural-​n etwo​rk-​a ctiv​i ty-​f rom-​o ur-​a rtif​i cial-​i ntel​
ligen​ce-​how-​compu​ters-​learn-​techs​hop/
Thornberg, R., & Charmaz, K. (2014). Grounded theory and theoretical coding. The SAGE handbook
of qualitative data analysis, 5, 153–169.
Touretzky, D., Gardner-McCune, C., Breazeal, C., Martin, F., & Seehorn, D. (2019a). A year in K-12
AI education. AI Magazine, 40, 88–90.
Touretzky, D., Gardner-McCune, C., Martin, F., & Seehorn, D. (2019b). Envisioning AI for K-12: What
should every child know about AI? Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence.,
33, 9795–9799. aaai.org.
Touretzky, D., & Gardner-McCune, C. (2018). Calypso for Cozmo: Robotic AI for Everyone (Abstract
Only). Proceedings of the 49th ACM Technical Symposium on Computer Science Education,
SIGCSE 2018, Baltimore, MD, USA, February 21–24, 2018, (p. 1110). https://​doi.​org/​10.​1145/​
31594​50.​31622​00
Tseng, T., Murai, Y., Freed, N., Gelosi, D., Ta, T. D., & Kawahara, Y. (2021). PlushPal: Storytelling with
Interactive Plush Toys and Machine Learning. Interaction Design and Children, 236–245.

13

International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education (2023) 33:325–383

383

Tsur, M., & Rusk, N. (2018). Scratch microworlds: Designing project-based introductions to coding. Proceedings of the 49th ACM Technical Symposium on Computer Science Education (pp. 894–899).
New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery.
U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. (2019). Employment Projections 2018–2028. U.S. Bureau of Labor
Statistics.
Vazhayil, A., Shetty, R., Bhavani, R. R., & Akshay, N. (2019). Focusing on Teacher Education to Introduce AI in Schools: Perspectives and Illustrative Findings. 2019 IEEE Tenth International Conference on Technology for Education (T4E), (pp. 71–77).
Williams, R., Park, H. W., & Breazeal, C. (2019, 5). A is for Artificial Intelligence: The Impact of Artificial Intelligence Activities on Young Children’s Perceptions of Robots. Proceedings of the 2019
CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (pp. 1–11). New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery.
Williams, R., Kaputsos, S., & Breazeal, C. (2021). Teacher Perspectives on How To Train Your Robot:
A Middle School AI and Ethics Curriculum. Proceedings of the 11th Symposium on Education
Advances in Artificial Intelligence (EAAI ‘21).
Winner, L. (1980). Do artifacts have politics? Daedalus, 109(1), 121–136.
Zhang, F., Bazarevsky, V., Vakunov, A., Tkachenka, A., Sung, G., Chang, C.-L., & Grundmann, M.
(2020). MediaPipe Hands: On-device Real-time Hand Tracking. Fourth CVPR Workshop on Computer Vision for Augmented and Virtual Reality (CV4ARVR).
Zimmerman, M. (2018). Teaching AI: Exploring new frontiers for learning. International Society for
Technology in Education.
Zimmermann-Niefield, A., Turner, M., Murphy, B., Kane, S. K., & Shapiro, R. B. (2019). Youth learning
machine learning through building models of athletic moves. Proceedings of the 18th ACM International Conference on Interaction Design and Children (pp. 121–132). New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery.

Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published
maps and institutional affiliations.

13

