See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/330851012

Game-based Learning and Gamiﬁcation: Searching for Deﬁnitions
Article in International Journal of Simulation: Systems, Science & Technology · February 2019
DOI: 10.5013/IJSSST.a.19.06.41

CITATIONS

READS

91

11,510

3 authors, including:
Hanif al Fatta

Zulisman Maksom

Universitas Amikom Yogyakarta

Technical University of Malaysia Malacca

81 PUBLICATIONS 1,009 CITATIONS

22 PUBLICATIONS 180 CITATIONS

SEE PROFILE

All content following this page was uploaded by Zulisman Maksom on 05 September 2019.
The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.

SEE PROFILE

HANIF AL FATTA et al: GAME-BASED LEARNING AND GAMIFICATION: SEARCHING FOR DEFINITIONS

Game-based Learning and Gamification: Searching for Definitions
Hanif Al Fatta

Zulisman Maksom

Mohd Hafiz Zakaria

Faculty Of Computer Science
Universitas AMIKOM Yogyakarta
Yogyakarta, Indonesia
hanif.a@amikom.ac.id

Faculty of ICT
Universiti Teknikal Malaysia Melaka
Melaka Malaysia
zulisman@utem.edu.my

Faculty of ICT
Universiti Teknikal Malaysia Melaka
Melaka Malaysia
hafiz@utem.edu.my

Abstract - Different forms of computer games are widely used in the education field. Designing appropriate games can increase the
acceptance of learning content by the learner. This study presents a definition of games, computer games, and the games that are
employed within education. The definition of edutainment, educational games, game-based learning, and gamification are
presented. The role of serious games for learning are clearly described. The differences between game-based learning and
gamification are formulated. Researchers will find these findings helpful to distinguish game-based learning and gamification and
to determine suitable designs for delivering learning content.
Keywords - games, edutainment, educational games, game-based learning, gamification.

I. INTRODUCTION
The development of technology led to the fascinating
progress of computer games. Despite the adverse effect of
the computer game, positive involvement of game into
several non-games areas is empirically proven [1], [2]. In the
education field, games can be utilized as a mean to deliver
learning content. Various form of game involvements in
learning and pedagogy can be found in several studies [3]–
[6]. Among them, game-based learning and gamification
have become the prominent concern to many researchers.
This study aims to highlight the differences between gamebased learning and gamification. This study also tracked
back the position of game-based learning and gamification in
delivering learning content. Understanding this may lead to
design appropriate design of learning deliverance. Some
situation is suitable to solve by game-based learning, on the
other hand, another situation may be proper to solve by
game-based learning.
II. GAMES AND DIGITAL GAMES
Games is an activity that closely connected to the
history of humankind. Games are sometimes related to
"play" concept, as well as "fun" as they are basic
characteristics of humankind. Johan Huizinga, [7] denotes
play as an independent activity that considered as " not
serious." The play can capture the player "intensely and
utterly." Play defines specific rules and order, free from
material interests and promote the creation of social
grouping. Roger Callois [8] stated that play as a noncompulsory activity, with uncertain outcomes, defined by
rules, generates no material fortune and uses its space and
time.
Encyclopedia Britannica [9], differs play from games by
several conditions. The Play is considered as spontaneous

DOI 10.5013/IJSSST.a.19.06.41

41.1

play, while games are regarded as organized play. An
organized play (games) can be divided into noncompetitive
games and competitive games (contest). And contests itself
encompass physical contest or intellectual contests.
Prenski [10] stated games are a combination of fun and
play, a significant force that enables engagement between
games and their player. And furthermore, Prensky proposed
six fundamental structural elements of games comprising:
(1) Rules, (2) Goals and Objectives, (3) Outcomes and
Feedback, (4) Conflict or Competition or Challenge or
Opposition, (5) Interaction and (6) Representation or Story.
Besides, Prenski stated digital games as merely putting
games into a computer, where the most significant part of
computer-enhanced "play experience"-took place.
More recent definition of games is proposed by [11],
stated that playing games fulfill perennial psychological
necessity. A game is a mental or physical contest according
to specific objectives. Framework or rules determine what
player allowed and not allowed to do within a game realm.
And a digital game is any game executed on digital
equipment and cover the large variety of games played at
game console, mobile phone, tablet Computer, over the
internet, and even at the arcades. It means that serious
games implement serious combination of serious aspects
such as education, communication, or information and
playful characteristics of games (video games).
Furthermore, [12] argued that serious games should
combine video games with one or more utility function for
example training, data exchange, disseminating a message.
Furthermore, it has target market beyond entertainment are
for example education, training, communication, defense.
And finally, to classify the serious games, [12] proposed
G/P/S model consisted of gameplay, purpose, and sector, a
serious game should bring gameplay (G) as well as deliver
purpose (P) in specific domain (S).

ISSN: 1473-804x online, 1473-8031 print

HANIF AL FATTA et al: GAME-BASED LEARNING AND GAMIFICATION: SEARCHING FOR DEFINITIONS

III. SERIOUS GAMES
Since this study focused on digital game-based learning,
it is essential to verify the position of digital game-based
learning, e-learning, edutainment and serious games.
According to [13], their domain is somehow related and
overlapped.
The authors in [14] claim serious games are the games
that exclude fun, entertainment, and enjoyment from their
important objectives. Nevertheless, serious games still bring
entertainment, joy, and happiness to their user, with a
hidden purpose. For example, a game called America's
Army created by United States Army delivered an
entertaining experience to their use as a "soldier," but it has
hidden purposes that is training and testing environment for
mission rehearsal, intelligence capability training, survival
and first aid training.
Long before serious games became famous, edutainment
existed to bring combination of education and
entertainment. According to [14], edutainment represents
any form of education that also has an entertaining purpose.
And Edutainment is not limited to utilization of video
games or digital games but also any other variety of
application even though most of the edutainment is
delivered in video games.
Several studies showed that in the beginning, concepts
of edutainment brought strong evidence as the significant
education innovation. Implementation of these edu-games
delivered effective and efficient learning among variety
level of students in numerous subjects [15].
Unfortunately, some research reveals the weakness of
edutainment. According to [16], edutainment offered drill
and practices type of education blend into gameplay. It is
considered to be the worst kind of education activities.
Besides, [17] argued that edutainment is a perfect example
of Shavian reversals. Edutainment inherits poor
characteristics of their ancestors, worst type of education
activities (drill and practices) and less enjoyable gameplay.
Serious games definition that can be found in research or
industry area proposed that serious games bring
entertainment aspect with it, and sometimes employed
multimodal interaction to enhance their user's experience
[18], [19]. [20] stated that an essential component of a
serious game is the experience. A serious games’ user is
exposed to a designated environment that delivered unique
content such as know-how or expertise. Experience along
with two others components-entertainment and multimediashapes the definition of serious games. [20] also
differentiated serious games from training Simulator, video
games and sports as depicted in figure 1. Furthermore, [20]
also proposed a taxonomy of serious games that consists of
five elements: Activity, modality, interaction style,
Environment, and Interaction Style.

DOI 10.5013/IJSSST.a.19.06.41

41.2

Figure 1: the position of serious games among another application source:
[20]

Another definition is stated by [12], that summarized the
definition of serious games into :
Serious Game = Utilitarian function(s) + Video Game

It means that serious games implement a serious
combination of serious aspects such as education,
communication, or information and playful characteristics
of games (video games). Furthermore, [12] argued that
serious games should combine video games with one or
more utility function for example training, data exchange,
disseminating the message. Furthermore, it has target
market beyond entertainment are for instance education,
training, communication, defense. And finally, to classify
the serious games, [12] proposed G/P/S model consisted of
gameplay, purpose, and sector, a serious game should bring
gameplay (G) as well as deliver purpose (P) in a specific
domain ( S).
IV. GAME-BASED LEARNING
According to [21], nowadays' student is different from
the people our learning system was designed to give
learning. These students from all level of education
institutions denote the first generations that surrounded by
and employing the computer, computer games, mobile
device and another digital device during their growth
periods. They are so-called "Digital Natives." Digital
natives get used to twitch speed, multitasking, random
access, graphics-first, active, connected, fun, fantasy and
quick payoff world of their digital games, internet and
weary by existing learning approaches. " New media
socialization" created all these cognitive deviations and
changed the abilities and learning style of the Digital
Natives. This is the significant reason why digital gamebased learning arises and evolves.
Furthermore, [21] introduced digital game-based
learning, a term for utilization of educational game software

ISSN: 1473-804x online, 1473-8031 print

HANIF AL FATTA et al: GAME-BASED LEARNING AND GAMIFICATION: SEARCHING FOR DEFINITIONS

for learning. Prensky also stated that two significant reasons
why learning should be blended with games are radical
changes on learner and how to motivate this kind of
learners.
According to [22], the term “educational game” is
sometimes used to replace game based learning term. [22]
argued that definition of educational games is the utilization
of computer or video games to deliver immersive and
attractive learning experiences for giving particular learning
goal, experiences, and result.
Another definition is proposed by [23]. Their study
stated game-based learning is innovative learning approach
applying computer games completed with educational
value. It also covers games software equipped with
educational intention such as learning aid, teaching
improvement, and students' evaluation.
In addition, [24] proposed definitions of game-based
learning are the type of gameplay with defined learning
outcomes. Adjacent to this definition, (Plass, Perlin, &
Nordlinger, 2010) as stated in [25] argued that, the process
of designing games for educational purposes comprises
balancing the demand to encompass the subject matter with
the intention to emphasize on gameplay.
Based on existing theory and previous research, gamebased learning is believed as an effective learning
environment. There are at least four arguments that support
it: Motivation, Player Engagement, Additivity, and Graceful
Failure [25].
Furthermore, [26] proposed vital principles and
mechanisms involved within game-based learning as
depicted in figure 2. [26] also separate gamification from
game-based learning definition, as it stated gamification is
about employing ‘elements' taken from video-game design
to be adopted and implemented in various contexts, rather
than using sole video games.

V. GAMIFICATION
Gamification has been widely discussed among
academics, professionals in business and practitioners in
various areas such as learning, computer-human interaction,
health and information studies [27]. In a discussion
concerning digital game-based learning, gamification
sometimes comes up to the surface of the concept as it is
believed to be the same concept as gamification. This
section will explore the definitions of gamification and the
differences or if any relationships between those two
concepts.
It seemed that there is no precise or standardized
definition of what gamification is, but there is a little
linkage according to supporting theories and what
gamification covers. The term Gamification is used to
express those aspects of the interactive system that intend to
motivate and get end users to become involved, through the
utilization of game mechanics and elements [27].
Gamification is known since a long time ago, derived
from marketing efforts such as points card and rewards
memberships, structures of education, most crucial
scientific level, degrees and grade and productivity in the
workplace.[28]. [29] Proposed a strong definition that can
be used to distinct gamification with other gaming or
playing concepts. They claimed Gamification refers to:

the use (rather than the extension) of

design (rather than game-based technology or other
game- related practices)

elements (rather than full-fledged games)

characteristic for games (rather than play or
playfulness)

in non-game contexts (regardless of specific usage
intentions, contexts, or media implementation).
VI. GAMIFICATION AND GAME-BASED LEARNING
A study conducted by [30] stated game-based learning
employs a real game to deliver skill and knowledge. It has
an independent unit with a certain start, gameplay and
ending state. There is a "win state" for learner engaged
within game. And games offers different kind of
educational content in various setting.
On the contrary, Gamification only employs a small
number of game elements. The student does not interact
with the whole game from start to the end, and they get
involved in a session that utilizes game elements such as
getting awarded for finishing a task/problem, cope with
obstacle/challenge and getting points.
Game-based learning is sometimes employed as a oneperiod instructional occurrence to give formal learning
within the classroom as well as online. Otherwise,
gamification does not always take place in class. It can be
delivered to a learner PC or handheld devices [30].

Figure 2. The principles and mechanisms of game-based learning [26].

DOI 10.5013/IJSSST.a.19.06.41

41.3

ISSN: 1473-804x online, 1473-8031 print

HANIF AL FATTA et al: GAME-BASED LEARNING AND GAMIFICATION: SEARCHING FOR DEFINITIONS

TABLE 1: THREE TRAJECTORIES RELATING TO VIDEO GAMES
AND HCI

The use of
games in the
non-game
context

According to [29], within the socio-cultural trend of
ludification (an act of deception or mockery, see
https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/ludification), there are at least
three trajectories relating to video games and HCI: the
extension of games (pervasive games), the use of games in
non-game contexts, and playful interaction.
The use of games in non-game contexts falls into fullfledged games (serious games) and game elements, which
can be further differentiated into game technology, game
practices, and game design. The latter refers to
"gamification." The position of gamification within the
socio-cultural trend of ludification can be described in table
1 and figure 3.

Health Games
News Games
Persuasive Games
Simulation and Training
Games
Edugames
Design Games

Fullyfledged
games/
Serious
games

Games with Purposes
Game
elements

Game technology
Gameful design (Gamification)
Game practices

Extension of
games/
pervasive
games

Alternate Reality Games

Playful
Interaction

Serious Toys

LARPs
Augmented Reality Games
Location-based Games

.

Playful Design

Figure 3: Position of Gamification within other use of the game in non-game context [29].

DOI 10.5013/IJSSST.a.19.06.41

41.4

ISSN: 1473-804x online, 1473-8031 print

HANIF AL FATTA et al: GAME-BASED LEARNING AND GAMIFICATION: SEARCHING FOR DEFINITIONS

[8]

VII. CONCLUSIONS
This study has led us to these following proposed
concepts:
 Serious games are a part of digital games where the
serious or hidden purposes are well blended inside the
digital application where fun, entertainment and
enjoyment, is not a primary objective of the application
itself but as strategies to deliver the real purposes such as
education, training or basic knowledge in particular area.
 Serious games perfected edutainment concept to get rid of
drill and practice as a primary method for delivering
learning content, offering the richer concept of playing
such as puzzle, role-playing game, simulation, etc.
 Game-based learning that can be regarded as educational
games is a subset of serious games, where fully- fledged
game is developed to deliver immersive and attractive
learning experiences for giving particular learning goal,
experiences and result [22]. Thus, game-based learning is
a game containing learning content derived from school
curriculum or essential life skill to enhance the learning
experience that is believed increased the understanding of
learner upon delivered learning contents.
 On the other hand, gamification is a concept outside
serious games, since it implements game element-not
fully fledged game into a non-game environment. It can
be applied to school learning, software production
process, sales management or even into the web-based elearning application.
 Finally, it is undeniable that game-based learning differs
from gamification. Game-based learning presents fullyfledged games form while gamification utilizes game
element into non-game context without using fullyfledged games inside the activities.

[9]
[10]
[11]

[12]
[13]
[14]
[15]
[16]
[17]
[18]

[19]
[20]
[21]
[22]
[23]

REFERENCES
[1]
[2]
[3]

[4]

[5]
[6]
[7]

K. Squire, “41-Game Studies 0102_ Cultural framing of
computer_video,” pp. 1–13, 2001.
J. P. J. Gee, “Learning by Design: good video games as learning
machines,” E–Learning, vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 5–16, 2005.
S. Arnab et al., “The development approach of a pedagogicallydriven serious game to support Relationship and Sex Education
(RSE) within a classroom setting,” Comput. Educ., vol. 69, pp. 15–
30, 2013.
G.-J. Hwang, H.-Y. Sung, C.-M. Hung, I. Huang, and C.-C. Tsai,
“Development of a personalized educational computer game based
on students’ learning styles,” Etr&D-Educational Technol. Res.
Dev., vol. 60, no. 4, pp. 623–638, 2012.
M. Soflano, T. M. Connolly, and T. Hainey, “An application of
adaptive games-based learning based on learning style to teach
SQL,” Comput. Educ., vol. 86, pp. 192–211, 2015.
C. V. De Carvalho, “Is game-based learning suitable for engineering
education?,” IEEE Glob. Eng. Educ. Conf. EDUCON, 2012.
J. Huizinga, HOMO LUDENS: A STUDY OF PLAY-ELEMENT
IN CULTURE, 1st ed. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul Ltd,
1949.

DOI 10.5013/IJSSST.a.19.06.41

View publication stats

41.5

[24]
[25]
[26]
[27]
[28]
[29]

[30]

R. Caillois, Man, Play and Games. Urbana and Chicago: University
of Illinois Press, 2001.
Encyclopaedia
Britannica,
“Game
Recreation,”
https://www.britannica.com/topic/game-recreation ( Accessed April
1, 2018), 2018. .
M. Prensky, “Fun , Play and Games : What Makes Games
Engaging,” Digit. Game-Based Learn., pp. 1–31, 2001.
T. Baranowski, R. Buday, FAIA, D. I. Thompson, and J.
Baranowski, “Playing for Real: Video Games and Stories for HealthRelated Behavior Change,” Am J Prev Med, vol. 34, no. 1, pp. 74–
82, 2008.
J. Alvarez and D. Damien, An introduction to Serious game
Definitions and concepts, vol. 2. 2011.
T. Susi, M. Johannesson, and P. Backlund, “Serious Games – An
Overview,” Elearning, vol. 73, no. 10, p. 28, 2007.
D. R. Michael and S. L. Chen, “Serious Games: Games That
Educate, Train, and Inform,” Education, vol. October 31. pp. 1–95,
2005.
M. E. Gredler, “Games and Simulations and Their Relationships to
Learning,” Handb. Res. Educ. Commun. Technol. (2nd ed.), no. d,
pp. 571–581, 2004.
R. Van Eck, “Digital Game-Based Learning: It’s Not Just the Digital
Natives Who Are Restless,” Educ. Rev., vol. 41, no. 2, pp. 16–30,
2006.
S. Papert, “Does Easy Do It? Children, Games, and Learning,” Game
Developer Magazine, no. June 1998, p. 88, 1998.
S. Arnab, P. Petridis, I. Dunwell, and S. de Freitas, “Enhancing
Learning in Distributed Virtual Worlds through Touch: A Browserbased Architecture for Haptic Interaction,” Serious Games
Edutainment Appl., pp. 149–167, 2011.
U. Ritterfeld, M. Cody, and P. Vorderer, “Serious games:
Mechanisms and effects,” Serious Games Mech. Eff., pp. 1–530,
2009.
F. Laamarti, M. Eid, and A. El Saddik, “An overview of serious
games,” Int. J. Comput. Games Technol., vol. 2014, no. May 2016,
2014.
M. Prensky, Digital Game-Based Learning, 1st ed. New York:
McGraw Hill, 2001.
S. De Freitas, “Learning in Immersive worlds A review of gamebased learning Prepared for the JISC e-Learning Programme,” JISC
eLearning Innov., vol. 3.3, no. October 14, p. 73, 2006.
S. Tang, M. Hanneghan, and A. El Rhalibi, “Introduction to GamesBased Learning,” in Games-Based Learning Advancements for
Multi-Sensory Human Computer Interfaces : Techniques and
Effective Practices, 1st ed., K. Klinger, Ed. IGI Global, 2009, pp. 1–
17.
D. W. Shaffer, R. Halverson, K. R. Squire, and J. P. Gee, “Video
Games and the Future of Learning,” Phi delta kappan, pp. 1–13,
2005.
J. L. Plass, B. D. Homer, and C. K. Kinzer, “Foundations of GameBased Learning,” Educ. Psychol., vol. 50, no. 4, pp. 258–283, 2015.
C. Perrotta, G. Featherstone, H. Aston, and E. Houghton, Gamesbased Learning: Latest Evidence and Future Directions. 2013.
K. Seaborn and D. I. Fels, “Gamification in theory and action: A
survey,” Int. J. Hum. Comput. Stud., vol. 74, pp. 14–31, 2015.
M. J. Nelson, “Soviet and American precursors to the gamification
of work,” in Proceeding of the 16th International Academic
MindTrek Conference on - MindTrek ’12, 2012, p. 23.
S. Deterding, D. Dixon, R. Khaled, and L. Nacke, “From game
design elements to gamefulness: Defining gamification,” Proc. 15th
Int. Acad. MindTrek Conf. Envisioning Futur. Media Environ. MindTrek ’11, pp. 9–11, 2011.
K. Kapp, “Gamification: Separating Fact From Fiction,” Chief
Learn. Off., vol. 13(3), no. March, pp. 42–46, 2014.

ISSN: 1473-804x online, 1473-8031 print

