Learning and Instruction xxx (xxxx) xxx

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Learning and Instruction
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/learninstruc

Does embedding learning supports enhance transfer during
game-based learning?
Katie Bainbridge a, *, Valerie Shute b, Seyedahmad Rahimi d, Zhichun Liu b, Stefan Slater c,
Ryan S. Baker c, Sidney K. D’Mello a
a

Institute of Cognitive Science, University of Colorado, Boulder, USA
Department of Educational Psychology and Learning Systems, Florida State University, USA
Penn Center for Learning Analytics, University of Pennsylvania, USA
d
School of Teaching and Learning, College of Education, University of Florida, USA
b
c

A R T I C L E I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Keywords:
game-Based learning
Educational games
Learning supports
Physics playground
Animations

Educational video games are hypothesized to be good environments for promoting learning; however, research
on conceptual learning from games is mixed. We tested whether embedding a learning support in the form of
short animations illustrating physics concepts that can be used to aid gameplay improved learning. Ninety-six 7th
to 11th grade students were randomly assigned to play Physics Playground with or without the learning supports
over a 4-day period. Results indicate that students who played a version of the game with embedded learning
supports showed more improvement on a far- (d = 0.36), but not on a near-transfer physics assessment (d = 0.17)
compared to those who played without the supports. The learning supports did not affect students’ enjoyment
with the game. We conclude that the game-embedded animations were effective at promoting conceptual
learning without sacrificing the fun of game-based learning.

Video games show great potential for learning and may one day be a
valuable addition to classroom instruction (Gee, 2007; Kim & Shute,
2015; Mayer, 2014; Shute, Ke, et al., 2019, Young et al., 2012). How­
ever, educational game research is haunted by the following paradox:
increasing the learning decreases the fun, and increasing the fun de­
creases the learning (Shute, Ke, et al., 2019; Wright, 2017). Learning
outcomes for educational video games relative to traditional instruction
are highly mixed and vary widely depending on the characteristics of the
game (Mayer, 2014; Young et al., 2012). One way of improving the
learning from an educational game is to add learning supports, which aim
to scaffold players’ learning and help them transfer knowledge and skills
acquired in the game. However, many studies that successfully improve
learning outcomes of an educational video game with learning supports
utilize non-game elements (e.g. worksheets, vocabulary lists, advance
organizers, reflective summaries) that players are unlikely to voluntarily
engage with outside of a research context (Fiorella & Mayer, 2012;
Parong & Mayer, 2018). The current study aims to address this problem
by developing and testing a learning support that is seamlessly
embedded within an educational game, feels like a natural part of the
game, can aid with gameplay, and improves transfer of knowledge

outside of the game context.
1. What is transfer?
Learning in a game does not benefit students in the real world unless
they can apply what they learned in the game to a new context. This
ability to apply knowledge outside of the context in which it was learned
it is called transfer, and it can be surprisingly elusive to achieve (Singley
& Anderson, 1989). There are multiple potential levels of transfer:
specific, mixed, and general (Mayer, 2003). Specific transfer is limited to
contexts that are very similar to the one in which the learning occurred,
e.g., if the skills acquired playing chess on the computer only improves
the ability to play chess in chess club. General transfer is the opposite
extreme, in which learning in one context applies to all other related
contexts, e.g., if playing chess improves IQ. Mixed transfer (sometimes
called ‘the specific transfer of general skills’) is the middle ground be­
tween these two extremes; the generalizable skills used to play chess,
such as thinking multiple steps ahead and keeping various outcomes in
mind, can transfer to completely different contexts that use those skills
in a similar way (Mayer, 2003). For example, perhaps making a schedule

* Corresponding author.
E-mail address: kbrainbridge@gmail.com (K. Bainbridge).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.learninstruc.2021.101547
Received 11 April 2020; Received in revised form 25 August 2021; Accepted 20 September 2021
0959-4752/© 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

Please cite this article as: Katie Bainbridge, Learning and Instruction, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.learninstruc.2021.101547

K. Bainbridge et al.

Learning and Instruction xxx (xxxx) xxx

strong theoretical foundations. The evidence, however, is not so clear
cut when it comes to learning valued academic content and skills
assessed outside of the game environment (i.e., mixed transfer).

for multiple employees (which requires mentally tracking multiple
peoples’ availability and comparing alternative arrangements) would be
easier for a person who plays a lot of chess.
General transfer is largely agreed to be a myth, as previous attempts
to demonstrate it have been unsuccessful or debunked (Thorndike &
Woodworth, 1901; Sala & Gobet, 2017). Specific transfer is the easiest to
demonstrate experimentally, but if specific transfer is as far as learning
can extend, that implies that most classroom instruction will not be
useful outside of the school context, which is a pessimistic view of ed­
ucation. It also defies intuition that learning is only ever applied in
nearly identical contexts, and some researchers have suggested that the
imbalance of evidence supporting specific transfer over mixed transfer
may be the result of an inability to recognize transfer (Bransford et al.,
1999). Mixed transfer, while difficult to elicit under experimental set­
tings, does occur (Singley & Anderson, 1989), and is generally the goal
for most multimedia learning environments such as game-based
learning (Mayer, 2002). Accordingly, learning game designers and re­
searchers need to demonstrate that the learning that occurs in the game
will meaningfully transfer on assessments outside of the game. This is
the goal of the present study, where we further differentiate between
“near” mixed transfer and “far” mixed transfer (Bainbridge, 2019). If the
new context in which the learning is applied is very similar to the game
context, perhaps even bordering on specific transfer, that would be an
example of near transfer. If the new context is sufficiently dissimilar to
the game context, that would be an example of far transfer.

3. Do learning games support academic learning?
Whether video games are effective learning tools in practice is still up
for debate and largely depends on the nature of the game (Mayer, 2014),
and review papers reveal mixed outcomes (e.g., Hanus & Fox, 2015;
Young et al., 2012). In terms of positive outcomes, well-designed
learning games have been successful in promoting learning in domains
ranging from visual-spatial abilities and attention (Green & Bavelier,
2007, 2012; Shute, Ventura, & Ke, 2015), persistence (Ventura, Shute, &
Zhao, 2013), creativity (Blanco-Herrera, Gentile, & Rokkum, 2019;
Jackson & Games, 2015), civic engagement (Ferguson & Garza, 2011),
and academic content and skills (Coller & Scott, 2009; DeRouin-Jessen,
2008; Habgood & Ainsworth, 2011). Despite these promising results, in
a review of nearly 300 articles, Young et al. (2012) found that only a
handful of studies demonstrated a learning benefit for a group that
played a STEM educational game relative to a group that received
traditional instruction. They conclude there is little support for the ac­
ademic value of educational video games for math and science. n some
instances, participants in the educational game condition performed
worse than those who received traditional instruction (Adams, Mayer,
MacNamara, Koenig, & Wainess, 2012; Harris, 2008; Parchman, Ellis,
Christinaz, & Vogel, 2000; Swaak, De Jong, & Van Joolingen, 2004).
However, many of these cases can be attributed to method, rather than
to the medium of games (Mayer, 2014).
Rather than speaking to whether video games are effective learning
tools altogether, studies tell us that the way the game groups and control
groups were implemented in that instance largely determined the out­
comes, both good and bad. We can learn from the failures and successes
of prior educational game interventions what elements do and do not aid
learning.
For example, in a study comparing a discovery learning inspired
physics game to expository text instruction, the hypothesis that the pure
discovery environment of the game would enhance intuitive physics
knowledge was not supported; the group that read expository text per­
formed better than the game group on both definitional and intuitive
physics questions with an overall effect size of d = 0.43 (Swaak et al.,
2004). This indicates that while the opportunity for discovery learning is
an appealing aspect of educational video games, there are caveats to
how it should be implemented. Pure discovery learning, with minimal
guidance and instruction, has been shown in multiple contexts to mostly
benefit high-achieving learners with high prior knowledge, and to lead
to worse outcomes for other learners (Kittel, 1957; Mayer, 2004; Papert,
1980). It is likely that the players needed more structure and guidance
than Swaak et al. (2004) incorporated into their physics game for
effective learning to occur.
In a study by Parchman and colleagues (2009), navy electronic
technician trainees were taught basic electricity and electronics funda­
mentals with one of four methods: computerized drill and practice
(digital flashcards), enhanced computer-based instruction (a lesson
given digitally with text, narration, models, animations, and quizzes), an
educational video game, and traditional classroom instruction. Trainees
who were taught with the educational video game improved less from
pretest to posttest than the flashcard and digital lesson conditions (d =
− 0.79). In this case, it is likely that the game put too much extraneous
load on the players as it was a role-playing game that was heavy on
narrative content. It is very possible that the educational content in this
game (i.e., fundamentals of electricity) was not as memorable as the
narrative content, and that players developed their schemas around the
narrative rather than around the principles of electricity.
Along this vein, multiple studies have shown that adding too much
irrelevant content in the pursuit of improving interest or fun will usually
backfire (Harp & Mayer, 1997). Moreno and Mayer (2000) refer to this

2. Theoretical and empirical foundations of game-based
learning
Developmental psychologists have long suggested that play is a
primary mode of learning for humans (Piaget, 1972), a framework that
has inspired countless play and game-based curricula over the years
(Montessori, 1976). However, Huizinga (1980) warned that focusing too
much on education during play can hurt both. The most essential feature
of play is pleasure, and once the learning becomes more important than
the pleasure, the benefits of play are lost (Huizinga, 1980). Learning
game designers must balance between ensuring their games promote
learning without ruining the enjoyment that makes game learning an
appealing pedagogical tool.
An important step towards this goal is to adopt a theory-based
approach to game design. According to Mayer (2014), a game has five
definable features. Games are: (1) rule-based – there is a knowable set of
rules and/or causal systems; (2) responsive – the environment reacts to
player actions; (3) challenging – they provide opportunities for success
at progressively difficult tasks; (4) cumulative – the environment reflects
the player’s past actions and allows for goal setting; and (5) inviting –
the environment is interesting and fun for the player.
Video games are media that apply these features to a computer or
digital setting. Learning games (also called “educational games” or
“serious games”) are video games meant to promote learning, as
opposed to a game that primarily aims to entertain. It is easy to see why
learning games would lend themselves to an educational goal, as they
share many elements with good learning environments (Shute, Rieber, &
Van Eck, 2011). In particular, the responsive elements of games
encourage active learning (Bransford, Brown, & Cocking, 2000; Vos­
niadou, Ioannides, Dimitrakopoulou, & Papademetriou, 2001) and can
provide immediate, individualized feedback (Shute, Ventura, & Kim,
2013; Vollmeyer & Rheinberg, 2005). The inviting elements of games
stimulate interest and motivation (Gee, 2007; Rotgans & Schmidt,
2011). The challenging and cumulative elements of games provide adap­
tive difficulty so that players keep working at the upper limit of their
ability (Vygotsky, 1987). In addition, challenges and dynamic feedback
in games helps create an environment that can foster the sense of flow
(Csikszentmihá lyi, 1990) and potentially cultivate the mindset that
generates persistence despite failure (Dweck, 2008). Thus, the argument
that educational video games should benefit learning outcomes has
2

K. Bainbridge et al.

Learning and Instruction xxx (xxxx) xxx

as the coherence principle of multimedia learning, which posits that as
many elements as possible within the learning environment should be
relevant to the learning goal, minimizing extraneous load. Indeed, there
is converging evidence that a greater amount of narrative interest in an
educational game (at least when the content is not narrative in nature as
it would be in a history game) is detrimental to good learning outcomes
in games (Pilegard & Mayer, 2016).
A study by Adams et al. (2012) corroborates the need to be wary of
both discovery learning and excessive narrative in educational video
games. They compared a discovery learning game about pathogens to a
content-matched slideshow lesson. Participants in the game condition
performed worse than the participants in the slideshow condition on
assessments of retention (d = 1.37) and transfer (d = 0.57). In a second
experiment they found that participants in a narrative-heavy learning
game about electricity performed worse than participants in a
content-matched slideshow condition on assessments of the electricity
content (d = − 0.31). The message of these studies is that learning games
should provide players with sufficient guidance and avoid superfluous
narrative.
One of the most common pitfalls in all genres of game-based learning
is conflating improvement in the game for learning (Melby-Lervag,
Redick & Hulme, 2016; Owen et al., 2010; Redick et al., 2013; Simons
et al., 2016). In order for learning within the game to be meaningful, the
player must be able to transfer that learning outside of the game. One of
the biggest culprits of this conflation is the “brain-training” game plat­
form Lumosity. The developers’ research shows consistent gains for
regular players on an internal measure of cognitive ability, the Lumosity
Brain Index (LBI), which is heavily based on the training games them­
selves (Hardy et al., 2015). However, independent researchers find no
evidence of transfer on independent measures (e.g., visual attention)
(Bainbridge & Mayer, 2018; Schwartz, Chase, Oppezzo, & Chin, 2011).
In order to demonstrate effectiveness, an educational game must be
studied using measures of transfer, and ideally mixed transfer in an
environment dissimilar enough to be considered far transfer.
In summary, the inconsistent outcomes in the game-based learning
literature suggest that more work needs to be done to establish under
what circumstances educational games successfully improve learning,
especially when that learning is assessed outside of the game. The
theoretical similarities between video game environments and good
learning environments, along with some experimental evidence showing
educational games can be effective, are encouraging and warrant
continued research on incorporating learning games into classroom in­
struction. One promising line of research involves the use of learning
supports within games.

see Mayer, 2014 and Wouters & van Oostendorp, 2013). Here we focus
on learning supports from Melby-Lervåg, Redick, and Hulme’s (2016)
framework that are particularly well suited to improving academic
outcomes: pretraining and coaching.
Both pretraining and coaching use the principles of cognitive load
theory (Paas & Sweller, 2014), which proposes that the amount of in­
formation an individual can simultaneously process in working memory
is inherently limited. If more information than the learner can handle is
presented at once, no learning (or worse, incorrect learning) will occur.
There are three types of cognitive load: extraneous, essential and
generative. Extraneous cognitive load is cognitive processing that does
not serve the learning goal (e.g., an unrelated graphic). Essential
cognitive load is the minimum processing that is required to represent
the information in working memory. The more complex the topic, the
more essential cognitive load is necessary, and the more processing
capacity will be used. Generative cognitive load is processing required
for deeper understanding or insight. Generative processing can’t happen
if the learner’s capacity is taken up by extraneous or essential cognitive
load. According to cognitive load theory, learning supports should work
to minimize extraneous load and manage the amount of essential load in
order to free up room for generative cognitive load. Both pretraining and
coaching do just that.
Pretraining refers to prior instruction meant to enhance the player’s
ability to learn from the game. Complicated game mechanics can
overwhelm learners with too much extraneous load, leaving few
cognitive resources available for the essential processing needed to
understand the content underlying the game (Paas & Sweller, 2014).
This can be mitigated by acquainting players with the educational
content prior to game play. Pretraining can also activate existing prior
knowledge, which likewise improves learning outcomes (Mayer, 1983).
Coaching is similar to pretraining, but occurs throughout the gaming
experience. It also aims to reduce extraneous load, but is an ongoing
process that continually encourages players to relate their game actions
to the learning content rather than relying on the activation of prior
knowledge, as in pretraining. This encourages players to keep the ma­
jority of their cognitive load on the essential processing rather than the
extraneous elements of the game environment that don’t relate to the
learning goal.
Both types of learning supports can theoretically mitigate some of the
failures of the educational games described above. Pretraining and
coaching provide structure and guidance, which avoid the pitfalls of
pure discovery learning (Adams et al., 2012; Swaak et al., 2004). Like­
wise, by highlighting the underlying educational content in the game,
coaching and pretraining may reduce the likelihood that the player will
pay more attention to the narrative or other superfluous details than to
the learning content/objectives.
Several studies show advantages for adding pretraining to an
educational game. For example, in a study on a farming simulation
game, Leutner (1993) randomly assigned players to receive (a) a tutorial
on farming concepts before they started playing, or (b) just play the
game. The pretrained group performed better than the control group on
a posttest of applied farming concepts with an effect size of d = 0.55.
Similarly, Fiorella and Mayer (2012) found that players who received a
worksheet listing electricity principles before they played a game in
which they manipulated electrical conduction to solve puzzles scored
better on a posttest of electricity concepts than players who did not
receive the worksheet (d = 0.77).
Coaching has also been shown to be effective at improving learning
outcomes in educational games. Using the same farming simulation
game, Leutner (1993) reported that players randomly assigned to be
connected to an online advice forum – provided warnings, corrections,
and comments in response to their choices in the game – performed
better on an applied posttest of farming concepts than those who played
a base version of the game (d = 0.85). In a study by Cameron and Dwyer
(2005), a group that receive explanatory feedback after every choice in a
cardiophysiology simulation game performed better (d = 0.57) on a

4. Theoretical and empirical foundations of learning supports
within games
Much as failures in the literature can teach us how not to implement
video games for learning, successes in the research can help us identify
what features do result in effective game learning outcomes. Research
that aims to isolate exactly what features are effective is sometimes
referred to as the value added approach (Mayer, 2014). In this approach,
a feature that should theoretically improve an outcome of interest (e.g.,
learning, grit, motivation, interest) is added to an educational game.
Researchers then compare the outcome of interest in players who play
the standard version of the game to players who received the added
feature.
Learning supports are features added to an educational game meant
to improve learning outcomes. Overall, a meta-analysis of value-added
studies in the educational game literature revealed that adding
learning supports to educational games resulted in a d = 0.37 (sigma)
effect size advantage for players who received supports over those who
played a standard version of the game (Clark, Tanner-Smith, & Kill­
ingsworth, 2016). Multiple frameworks and categories of learning sup­
ports for educational games exist in the literature (for notable examples
3

K. Bainbridge et al.

Learning and Instruction xxx (xxxx) xxx

delayed assessment of cardiophysiology relative to the control group
that did not receive explanations.
ter Vrugte et al., (2017) provide a notable example of adding
coaching-style learning support to an educational game. They compared
a group of students who played a proportional reasoning math game to a
group that played the game with faded worked examples. They found
that students who played the game with faded worked examples
improved more than the control group on transfer measures with an
effect size of d = 0.60. However, Vrugte and colleagues (2016) did not
measure participants’ subjective experience of the game, and forcing
students to see solutions to the puzzles they were solving before they had
a chance to figure it out for themselves could have made the game less
fun to play. Educational game studies need to take enjoyment into ac­
count, because if the students are not enjoying the game, why use a game
at all?

physical events). We conducted a classroom study to investigate
whether adding a learning support intended to explicitly link students’
gameplay experiences with physics concepts improves learning of the
underlying physics concepts on out-of-game assessments. Students were
randomly assigned to either play a version of Physics Playground with no
supports or a version with the learning supports. We hypothesized that
(1) students who received the learning supports would have higher
scores on a physics transfer posttest than students who played the game
with no supports. The learning supports were designed to feel more like
a natural part of the game than in the hope that this would help the
educational content of the game to feel like gameplay instead of like
schoolwork and thus avoid the traditional trade-off between increasing
learning and decreasing fun (Shute, Ke, et al., 2019). We additionally
hypothesized that (2) the learning supports would not harm players’
experience of the game, such that students who play Physics Playground
with learning supports would not report lower enjoyment of the game
than students who play a base version of Physics Playground with no
supports. If the support investigated here is effective it could inspire
future educational games to incorporate similar learning supports that
embed elements of pretraining and/or coaching into the gameplay itself.

5. Embedded animations as learning supports
Existing approaches to embedding learning supports in games,
despite being effective, have one major limitation. Many of the supports
reviewed above took the form of a paper worksheet, a list of terms, or an
interruption to the gameplay, such as prompts to summarize or reflect to
promote generative processing. The majority of these interventions are
likely only possible under supervised, controlled conditions like a lab­
oratory study. The effectiveness of video games in promoting learning is
greatly reduced if the likelihood of the student engaging with the very
element (the learning support) that makes the game effective is minimal.
Moreover, interrupting a fun game with academic-like activities (e.g.,
worksheet) reduces one of the biggest appeals of video games: the fun
(Shute, Ke, et al., 2019).
Our goal was thus to incorporate aspects of pretraining and coaching
without relying on elements outside of the game (like a worksheet) and
without significantly disrupting the game experience (like a reflection).
We selected game-based animations which combine elements of pre­
training and coaching, depending on how and when the player uses it.
The supports are short – about a minute long – and are directly
embedded in the gameplay, so they should not feel disruptive or tedious,
nor should they strain cognitive load. They are also designed to look and
feel like a natural part of the game, and can give players insights into
how to improve gameplay or reflect on their gameplay, while connecting
what they do in the game with the underlying content.
Animations have been shown to be effective learning supports in
many learning contexts, not just games. There is still some debate over
whether animations are more effective than simply providing a static
diagram (Mayer, Hegarty Mayer, & Campbell, 2005); it could be that the
continuous motion adds more extraneous load than necessary, when a
static image would suffice. However, a meta-analysis of 61 studies of
learning from animations found an overall positive effect of g = 0.23 in
favor of learning from animations over learning from static graphics
(Berney and Bé trancourt, 2016). This effect size is increased when the
animations feature narration (g = 0.34) and when the animations did not
include redundant narration and text (g = 0.88) Both of these findings fit
theories of multimedia learning (Mayer, 2009), which recommend
taking advantage of both auditory and visual channels of information
processing to minimize extraneous load and manage essential load (Paas
& Sweller, 2014). Our animations were heavily informed by these
multimedia principles. Table 3 details how these principles were
incorporated into our animation design.

7. Method
7.1. Participants and design
Our sample consisted of 96 students from two different K-12 schools.
School A was a private school located in Pennsylvania. and the students
generally were of a relatively high socioeconomic status. The partici­
pants in School A (n = 51) were primarily white (80%) with a balanced
gender distribution (49% female and 51% male). They were mostly
enrolled in ninth and 10th grade. School B was a public school located in
the southeastern U.S. The participants in School B (n = 46) were more
diverse (31% White, 46% Black), and also had a balanced gender dis­
tribution (42% female, 51% male). Most of the participants in School B
were enrolled in grades 7–8. Twenty-eight percent of the students at
school B were eligible for free or reduced-price lunch, an indicator of
socio-economic status.
All participants were randomly assigned to one of two conditions
(School A: 25 to treatment and 26 to control; School B: 24 to treatment
and 21 to control). They were compensated with a $30 gift card after
completing the experiment. See Table 1 for more detail on the partici­
pants. IRB approval was obtained from both the University of
Table 1
Participant demographic information (number of participants in each cell).

6. Current study
The aim of the current study is to test game-embedded animations as
effective learning supports in a game. We implemented the supports in
the context of Physics Playground (PP; Shute, Almond, & Rahimi, 2019),
a video game shown to benefit secondary school students’ intuitive,
informal understanding of physics principles (e.g., predicting simple
4

School A

School B

Sex
Male
Female
Decline

25
26
0

24
19
2

Grade
7th grade
8th grade
9th grade
10th grade
11th grade

0
0
38
12
1

21
20
4
0
0

Ethnicity
Black
White
Asian
Hispanic
Mixed Ethnicity

1
41
5
1
4

21
14
2
0
5

Condition
Control
Treatment

26
25

21
24

K. Bainbridge et al.

Learning and Instruction xxx (xxxx) xxx

Learning Supports. The Learning Supports are short physics ani­
mation videos that illustrate a relevant physics concept (e.g., properties
of torque) in the Physics Playground environment, accompanied by
narration. They illustrate the physics principle underlying that level
within the PP environment using formal physics terminology.
Players can use the targeted principle from the Learning Support to
figure out how best to solve the level or to reflect on the physics prin­
ciples underlying a successful or unsuccessful solution to a level. For
example, consider the level Double Hoppy (see Fig. 1a), where the so­
lution is to drop an object on the right side of a springboard to launch the
ball into the air. On this level, the Learning Support would show a
different PP level environment that demonstrates how bending a
springboard can launch the ball into the air (see Fig. 1b). This Learning
Support is intended to communicate that transferring energy to the ball
with a springboard will help them solve the level, while also presenting
the formal physics terminology that corresponds to that concept (i.e.,
elastic potential energy can transfer to kinetic energy).
Each Learning Support illustrates the specified physics concept using
the relevant simple machine and appropriate physics terms. A narrator
speaks over the animation, explaining how what is illustrated relates to
the underlying physics concept. Keywords are printed over the anima­
tion for emphasis. See Fig. 1b for a frame-by frame depiction of the EcT:
Springboard PA, including narration transcription.
The Learning Support design was informed by theories of transfer
and multimedia learning (see Table 3). They are meant to use elements
of pre-training and coaching to draw attention to the educational con­
tent and connect it with the gameplay. They combine narration and
visualization in accordance with the multimedia, modality, and redun­
dancy principles. The utilize signaling and segmenting to manage
essential load and minimize extraneous load. Thus, the Learning Sup­
ports should be effective at improving learning outcomes in physics,
which is what we test here.
We developed seven Learning Supports relevant to the levels selected
for this study. Each is about a minute long. They fall under two over­
arching categories: Energy can Transfer (EcT) and Properties of Torque
(PoT). In the EcT category there are four videos: Lever, Pendulum, Ramp,
and Springboard. In the PoT category there are three videos: Lever: Dis­
tance, Lever: Mass, and Springboard. All seven videos are different,
although they may cover related topics. To ensure each video was seen
at least once, three of the videos were triggered to play at the beginning
of a relevant level for the treatment group (e.g., when players in the
support condition entered the level “Tetris”, they would first be asked to
watch the video “Energy can Transfer: Ramp” to see an abstracted
explanation of the solution), and four of the videos were triggered to
play at the end of a relevant level (e.g., when players solved the level
“Uphill Battle” they were prompted to watch the video “Energy can
Transfer: Pendulum” before they moved on). In addition, the treatment
group had access to a Learning Support relevant to the solution of every
level through the “Help” button in the lower right-hand corner of the
screen.
Other game supports. Although the control condition did not have
access to Learning Supports, either triggered automatically or available

Pennsylvania and Florida State University; these institutions led the data
collection. Parental permission was obtained with a signature and
returned directly to the researchers. Student assent information was
provided verbally in class before the study began and was also provided
in a written form, which students signed and returned directly to the
researcher shortly before the study began.
Our sample size was determined by availability of students and
participating teachers for the four-day testing period. It also involved
members of the research team traveling to data collection sites, which
also restricted the data collection window.
7.2. Materials
Physics Playground. Physics Playground (PP) is a 2-dimensional,
web-based computer game designed to help middle and high school
students learn conceptual physics related to Newton’s laws of force and
motion, linear momentum, energy, and torque (Shute, Ke, et al., 2019).
The game dynamically responds to players’ interactions with the game.
This responsiveness is accomplished via detailed formal simulation of a
virtual physics “world” using actual, accurate physics formulas and
calculations to account for mass, gravity, friction, momentum, and many
other physics concepts.
The goal of the game is to move a green ball to hit a red balloon
among a variety of obstacles. It is meant to be solved by players drawing
simple machines (i.e., ramp, lever, pendulum, and springboard), that
interact with the two-dimensional environment according to Newtonian
mechanics. To illustrate, Fig. 1a shows screenshots of the level Double
Hoppy. One solution, shown in Fig. 1a, is to draw an object above the ball
and drop the object on the right side of the springboard to launch the
ball to the balloon. The game has over 100 levels, but a subset of 28
levels was used for the current study. The first 5 levels are tutorial levels
which introduce the participant to essential game actions such as
nudging the ball and drawing simple machines like levers, pendulums,
and springboards. After the tutorial, the levels differ in difficulty ac­
cording to a variety of factors such as the distance between the ball and
the balloon, number of obstacles presented, novelty of the problem, and
the number of objects or parameters required to solve the level. The
levels are organized into playgrounds, and while they are presented in a
linear order, students can freely navigate among the various levels and
playgrounds. Students earn gold or silver coins upon solving a level.
Gold coins are earned if the student draws the minimum number of
objects needed to solve the level. For example, in the Double Hoppy
example above, if the student draws one object for the lever and one
object for the ball/weight, and nothing else, they would receive a gold
coin. If they used more than the minimum number of objects for a level,
they received a silver coin.
Game elements in PP include ongoing feedback, interactive problem
solving, and adaptive challenges. Moreover, because there is not just one
correct “answer” to a problem in PP, and the game allows players to
create their solutions by drawing objects that come alive, these features
foster curiosity and discovery, which is not typically present in more
traditional learning environments.

Fig. 1a. The level “Double Hoppy” can be solved by drawing an object and dropping that object on a springboard, which transfers the energy from the falling object
to the ball so it can reach the balloon.
5

K. Bainbridge et al.

Learning and Instruction xxx (xxxx) xxx

Fig. 1b. The Learning Support for “Double Hoppy” shows how a springboard can be used to solve a different level in Physics Playground. It illustrates that dropping
an object on a springboard will transfer energy from the object to the ball, which will move the ball to the balloon. All Learning Supports can be seen on the Physics
Playground Youtube channel.

Physics Knowledge Assessment. We created two comparable 14item physics test forms for pretest and posttest, each of which
included ten near-transfer test items and four far-transfer test items that
were developed with the help of two physics experts. The near transfer
items were designed with two principles: (1) reduction and simplifica­
tion of the items and their choices, and (2) providing the items in the
context of PP (i.e., including a video or an image from the PP environ­
ment (Fig. 1c). The similarity to the learning environment is why these
items are considered “near” transfer. The far-transfer items were a
subset (only EcT and PoT) from a conceptual physics test based on the
Force Concept Inventory (FCI) (Hestenes, Wells, & Swackhamer, 1992)
that has been used in previous studies. These items do not have the look
and feel of PP (Fig. 1d), nor did they have the look and feel of the
Learning Supports. In fact, the Learning Supports are more similar to the
near transfer items because they use the Physics Playground
environment.
Game and Learning Supports Satisfaction Survey. We used a
researcher-created 16-item, 5-point Likert scale questionnaire (1 =
“low” to 5 = “high”) to measure game enjoyment with ten items (e.g., “I
enjoyed the game very much”), and satisfaction with the learning sup­
ports using six items (e.g., “The supports helped me understand the
physics”). The questionnaire was identical between conditions with the
exception of one question (“The ‘Show Physics’ option helped me learn
physics”) which was only provided to those in the treatment condition
because the control group did not receive this option.

Fig. 1c. The near transfer items that assess transferring energy with spring­
boards present the question in a Physics Playground level, using the same
simple machine participants draw to solve levels. The goal on these assessments
is the same as it is in the game: how best to get the ball to the balloon?.

through the help menu, they did have access to other resources when
they were stuck. Participants in both conditions could click a “Help”
button at the bottom right of the screen to gain access to Solution Videos
(SVs) through a “show solutions” button or receive reminders of the
controls and simple machines they learned about during the tutorial
levels through a “Show Game Tips” button. SVs showed a video of the
solution to that specific level with no voice over and no physics terms. If
there was more than one solution to a level, more than one solution
video was available.

7.3. Procedure
The experiment in both locations consisted of four days of class time,
6

K. Bainbridge et al.

Learning and Instruction xxx (xxxx) xxx

Fig. 1d. The far transfer items that involve springboards present the question in a new environment, and the springboards in question are not the same as the ones
drawn in the game. The context of the questions is more natural, and the application of the physics concepts is more varied than in the near transfer items.

with four 45–50 min sessions per class. Participants at School A used
MacBook laptop computers provided by the school. Participants at
School B used Surface Pros provided by the researchers. All students
were provided with a mouse and headphones, but if they preferred to
use their own headphones that was permitted. All pretest and posttest
measures were completed online using Qualtrics.
Day 1 consisted of participants completing a demographic survey
and the physics knowledge pretest. This was followed by an introduction
to PP tutorial that consisted of five “tutorial” levels that explicitly
walked the player through how to use the game controls and draw the
simple machines needed to solve levels. Participants then began the 28
gameplay levels targeting the concepts of Energy and Transfer and
Properties of Torque. The levels were presented in a pre-determined
order, but players could jump around to different levels or return to
levels if they chose. Days 2 and 3 consisted of continued gameplay of
those 28 levels. Day 4 consisted of some gameplay followed by the
completion of the online posttest, game satisfaction survey, and
compensation for participation.

8. Results
Descriptive statistics for all measures are shown in Table 2. To ensure
that pre-existing differences between subjects did not influence our re­
sults, we analyzed pretest scores across schools and conditions. A t-test
revealed that there was a significant difference between School A and
School B, t(94) = 4.03, p < 0.01, with School A performing significantly
better (M = 8.53, SD = 2.34) on the pretest than School B (M = 6.69, SD
= 2.10). While SES differences between the schools likely play a role,
age likely underlies much of the performance gap between the schools,
as the average grade level of a participant at School A was 2 years above
the average grade level of participants in School B. A Mann-Whitney U
Table 3
Multimedia learning principles and how they relate to learning from physics
animations (PAs).

Table 2
Means, standard deviations, and ranges for assessment performance by group.
Variable

Group

Mean

SD

Observed
Range

Pretest Total (Range: 0, 14)

Control
Treatment
Control
Treatment
Control
Treatment
Control
Treatment
Control
Treatment
Control
Treatment
Control
Treatment
Control
Treatment
Control
Treatment
Control
Treatment

8.00
7.35
5.83
5.53
2.17
1.82
9.57
9.65
6.64
6.69
2.94
2.96
1.57
2.31
0.81
1.16
0.77
1.14
3.88
3.94

2.46
2.33
2.05
1.76
0.82
0.93
1.60
1.95
1.24
1.48
0.85
0.82
0.85
0.82
2.08
1.97
1.11
0.98
0.81
0.86

2, 13
3, 13
1, 9
2, 9
1, 4
0, 4
6, 12
5, 14
4, 9
3, 10
1, 4
1, 4
− 3, 8
− 3, 10
− 3, 6
− 3, 7
− 2, 3
− 1, 3
1.80, 5
2.20, 5

Pretest Near Transfer (Range: 1,
10)
Pretest Far Transfer (Range: 0, 4)
Posttest Total (Range: 0, 14)
Posttest Near Transfer (Range: 1,
10)
Posttest Far Transfer (Range: 0,
4)
Total Gain
Near Transfer Gain
Far Transfer Gain
Enjoyment (Range: 1, 5)

Multimedia
Learning Principle

Definition

Animation characteristic

Multimedia
Principle

People learn better from
words and pictures than from
words alone.

PAs are narrated over a
visualization of the concept.

Modality Principle,
Redundancy
Principle

People learn better from
graphics and narrations than
from animation and onscreen text. But graphics,
narration AND on-screen text
isn’t helpful either. Graphics
and narration is the best
combination.

PAs do not have subtitles,
but are instead a
combination of narration
and a dynamic visualization
of that narration.

Signaling Principle

People learn better when
cues that highlight the
organization of the essential
material are added.

Keywords are displayed on
the screen at relevant times
in relevant places. Arrows
and other signaling tools aid
in highlighting how the
narration relates to the
animation

Segmenting
Principle

People learn better from a
multimedia lesson is
presented in smaller
segments rather than as a
continuous unit.

PAs are about a minute long
and cover only one concept
at a time

Coherence
principle

People learn better when
extraneous words, pictures
and sounds are excluded
rather than included.

PAs are designed to be
minimal and to induce as
little extraneous load as
possible

Citation: Melby-Lervåg, Redick, & Hulme, 2016
7

K. Bainbridge et al.

Learning and Instruction xxx (xxxx) xxx

indicated that the students at School B were significantly younger than
the students at School A (U = 76, p < 0.001. Fortunately a Chi-Square
test revealed that random assignment succeeded, and that School A
and School B were equally represented between the two conditions, X2
(1, N = 96) = 0.18, p = 0.67, so differences between schools should not
influence the effectiveness of the intervention. Nevertheless, we
included school as a covariate to serve as a proxy for both SES and age in
subsequent analyses to control for these differences. We separated the
assessment items into near, far, and overall (combination of near and far
transfer items) scores (see Fig. 2).
The treatment group received an average of 5.53 (SD = 1.71; range
3–10) Learning Supports over the course of the experiment. Only
Learning Supports that were engaged with (i.e. the participant didn’t
close it when it was triggered) are included in this count. Participants
had the option to close a triggered Learning Support at any time.

There was not a significant effect of condition on near transfer gain
scores, F(1,92) = 0.77, p = 0.38, d = 0.17. However, there was a sig­
nificant effect of condition on far transfer gain scores F(1,92) = 4.26, p
= 0.04, d = 0.36 whereby the treatment group (M = 1.14, SD = 0.98)
outperformed the control group (M = 0.77, SD = 1.11).
As a follow-up analysis, we correlated total duration of exposure to
Learning Supports in minutes with gain scores for the support group
only. The Learning Supports were triggered automatically, but were
voluntary; a player could exit out of the Learning Support at any time.
About 55% of the players exited at least one of the supports without
watching, making number of Learning Supports viewed a continuous
variable. Pearson correlations confirmed total duration of engagement
with the Learning Supports was marginally correlated with overall gain
(r = 0.25, p = 0.09) and significantly correlated with far transfer gain (r
= 0.29, p = 0.04), but not correlated with near gain (r = 0.16, p = 0.28).
Thus, exposure to the Learning Supports was indeed associated with
greater improvement on physics knowledge assessments applicable
outside of the game environment.

Hypothesis 1. The support group will outperform the control group on
the posttest
We first tested whether students showed improvement from pretest
to posttest. Paired-sample t-tests indicated that both the support and the
no-support groups improved significantly from pretest to posttest on
both near, t(95) = 4.79, p < 0.01, and far, t(95) = 8.90, p < 0.01,
transfer items. When the conditions are analyzed separately, t-tests show
that both the control condition [t(46) = − 4.33, p < 0.01] and the sup­
port condition [t(48) = − 6.70, p < 0.01] improved significantly from
pretest to posttest.
Next, we tested whether gain scores varied as a function of condition.
We conducted an ANCOVAs using gain scores (near and far) as the
dependent variable, group assignment as the independent variable, and
school and posttest duration as covariates. Posttest duration was
included as a covariate because there was considerable variability
among participants in regards to how long they spent on the posttest (M
= 484.40s, SD = 165.25s, Min = 287s, Max = 1165s). The posttest
occurred on the fourth day of the study and was subject to participant
fatigue and other motivation effects. A t-test showed that these potential
motivational differences were not a function of what condition students
were assigned to [t(94) = − 1.59, p = 0.12], so we chose to control for
this.

Hypothesis 2. Enjoyment will not be influenced by Learning Supports
A major drawback of adding learning supports to educational video
games is the risk that they will decrease player enjoyment. To assess
whether this was the case with the physics animation learning supports
(PAs), we compared the groups on the enjoyment sub-items of the Game
and Learning Supports Satisfaction questionnaire (Cronbach’s alpha =
0.85) using an ANOVA with group as a between-subjects’ factor and selfreported enjoyment as a dependent variable. The results revealed that
players in the treatment condition (M = 3.94, SD = 0.86) reported
comparable enjoyment to participants in the control condition (M =
3.88, SD = 0.81) who did not receive the Learning Supports, F(1,94) =
0.12, p = 0.74. Thus, adding the Learning Supports to gameplay did not
decrease players’ enjoyment of the game.
We also compared the groups on the satisfaction with supports sub
items of the Game and Learning Supports Satisfaction Questionnaire.
These supports include Game Tips and SVs for the control group and
Game Tips, SVs and Learning Supports in the treatment condition.
Players in the treatment condition reported comparable satisfaction
with the supports (M = 3.88, SD = 0.78) to those in the control condition

Fig. 2. Simple learning gains by condition. The error bars depict standard error.
8

K. Bainbridge et al.

Learning and Instruction xxx (xxxx) xxx

(M = 3.81, SD = 0.81), F(1,94) = 0.22, p = 0.64. The presence of
Learning Supports did not influence players’ perception of the game or
the help available to them.

power analysis conducted in G*Power (α = 0.05, 1-β = 0.80) suggested
would require 4796 participants in order to detect a difference with a
two-tailed test. Even if that many students could be recruited and a
significant effect found, the difference would not be meaningful; the
benefits to learning would still outweigh the small risk to enjoyment. A
power analysis conducted in G*Power on far transfer scores (ηp2 =
0.043, α = 0.05, 1-β = 0.80) recommended a total sample size of 182
students in order to detect a difference between the support and control
group on far gain with a two-tailed test. That the difference between
groups on far transfer gain was robust enough to be found, despite a
power analysis suggesting we would need 86 more participants than
were recruited, is noteworthy. Overall, while the sample size is limited,
we have no reason to believe that more participants would have changed
our results.
To address the limitations of the current study, future studies could
include two control groups: one that plays a standard version of the
game, and one that receives content-matched traditional instruction for
a comparable amount of time. With this design, one can make both
value-added and media comparison inferences from the results. A future
study could also investigate the value of making the supports voluntary
vs. involuntary. If transfer of learning really is tied to exposure to the
learning supports, shouldn’t a game with a learning goal require inter­
action with these features? Alternatively, removing the sense of choice
and control over the learning experience could potentially reduce
learner motivation, in accordance with Self-Determination Theory (Deci
& Ryan, 2012; Patall, Cooper, & Wynn, 2010; Schrader & Nett, 2018). A
design that compared a standard version of the game with no supports, a
version of the game with voluntary supports, and a version of the game
with mandatory supports, and then used both physics understanding
and motivation/effort as dependent variables would address this ques­
tion. Finally, replication with a larger sample is warranted.
The current study implemented the Learning Supports in three ways:
before a relevant level, after a relevant level was solved, or as “hints”
given during the level at the player’s whim; however, when a player sees
a learning support may have a profound impact on how and what the
player learns. Evidence from the Advance Organizer literature (Fensham
& West, 1976; Mayer, 1983), the Adjunct Question literature (Rothkopf,
1966; Rickards & Di Vesta, 1974), and the Productive Failure literature
(Kapur, 2016; Schwartz, Chase, Oppezzo, & Chin, 2011) all suggest
varying beneficial outcomes with different theoretical mechanisms for
placing learning support material before vs. after an active learning
exercise (of which an educational game is an example). A study design
comparing the learning outcomes when relevant learning supports are
given before vs. after a level would address which mechanism is best
suited to learning in this circumstance.
n summary, the current study aimed to develop and test a learning
support embedded in an educational game that was organic to the game
environment, did not disrupt game play, and felt more like part of the
game than learning supports of the same genre (pretraining and
coaching) had in previous interventions. The results indicate that this
aim was successful. Adding a physics animation video illustrating the
underlying physics principles relevant to the solution for the current
level improved far transfer learning outcomes in 7th-10th grade students
who played Physics Playground for approximately 3 h, without
decreasing their enjoyment of the game. The implications for future
educational game design await further research, such as whether or not
such learning supports should be voluntary and when the learning
supports should be presented. However, the current study does suggest
that embedded learning supports administered within the game envi­
ronment may be a fruitful direction for other educational games to
explore.

9. Discussion
The present study sought to improve upon existing learning supports
for educational video games. We developed animations illustrating
physics concepts (PAs) and embedded them within Physics Playground,
both as hints available through the help menu and as useful tips that
were occasionally triggered on relevant levels. We hypothesized that
participants who played a version of the game Physics Playground with
Learning Supports would improve more on a measure of physics un­
derstanding than participants who played a standard version of the
game. This hypothesis was partially supported. After controlling for
school affiliation and time spent on the posttest, the group that played
Physics Playground with physics animation Learning Supports demon­
strated greater improvement on far transfer measures of physics
knowledge with a medium effect size of d = 0.36. We also hypothesized
that adding the embedded Learning Supports to Physics Playground
would not decrease player enjoyment. This hypothesis was supported;
participants who played the game with Learning Supports reported the
same level of enjoyment as participants who played the game without
Learning Supports.
These results suggest that the embedded physics animation learning
supports developed for this game were effective at improving mean­
ingful learning that was transferred outside of the game without the use
of a more traditional academic support like a worksheet. The learning
that the control group acquired was mostly applicable within the game
environment, as evidenced by the lack of significant difference between
the groups on near gain scores. The Learning Supports helped the
treatment condition to transfer their experience to a situation distinct
from Physics Playground. This is evidence of the elusive mixed transfer;
these participants are more likely to be able to use knowledge obtained
during gameplay on a different, more academic-like, context. This boost
to the player’s ability to use and apply the academic content underlying
the game did not come at the cost of their enjoyment of the game.
Like all studies, ours has limitations. For one, we followed a valueadded model rather than a media comparison model (Mayer, 2014)
meaning that neither game condition was compared to another form of
physics instruction, such as a classroom lesson. Although both the con­
trol and support conditions improved from pretest to posttest on the
physics knowledge assessment, we cannot say whether this improve­
ment was greater than it would have been had the students spent a
comparable amount of time learning about the same concepts from a
lecture, textbook, or some other form of instructional support.
The voluntary, “opt-in” nature of the supports as currently imple­
mented limits the power of the comparison between groups, as over half
of the treatment group (55.1%) watched fewer than five Learning Sup­
ports throughout the 4-day intervention. These participants’ experience
of the game would have been functionally very similar to that of control
participants, muddying the waters of the group comparison. In addition,
greater exposure to the Learning Supports may reflect underlying indi­
vidual differences in that students who are more conscientious or more
intrinsically interested in the content are more likely to choose to watch
the supports. An experimental study taking away the element of choice,
or a study that included measures for conscientiousness and interest and
controlled for those factors would address this limitation.
Our sample size was informed by the practical limitations of gath­
ering data in a school setting. The lack of significant difference between
the support and control conditions on near and overall gain scores could
be due to an inadequate sample. However, the effect size for near
transfer was so low in our model that a power analysis could not be done
(ηp2 = 0.00), indicating that the insignificant difference between groups
found in this study was not due to power. Similarly, the difference in
enjoyment between groups produced an effect size of d = 0.07, which a

CRediT authorship contribution statement
Katie Bainbridge: Writing – original draft, Formal analysis, review
& editing. Valerie Shute: Funding acquisition, Conceptualization,
9

K. Bainbridge et al.

Learning and Instruction xxx (xxxx) xxx

Methodology, Formal analysis, review & editing. Seyedahmad Rahimi:
Conceptualization, Methodology, Data collection, Software, review &
editing. Zhichun Liu: Conceptualization, Methodology, review & edit­
ing. Stefan Slater: Conceptualization, Data collection, review & editing.
Ryan S. Baker: Funding acquisition, Conceptualization, review &
editing. Sidney K. D’Mello: Funding acquisition, Conceptualization,
Formal analysis, review & editing.

Hardy, J. L., Nelson, R. A., Thomason, M. E., Sternberg, D. A., Katovich, K., Farzin, et al.
(2015). Enhancing cognitive abilities with comprehensive training: A large, online,
randomized, active-controlled trial. PloS One, 10(9).
Harp, S. F., & Mayer, R. E. (1997). The role of interest in learning from scientific text and
illustrations: On the distinction between emotional interest and cognitive interest.
Journal of Educational Psychology, 89(1), 92.
Harris, D. (2008). A comparative study of the effect of collaborative problem-solving in a
Massively Multiplayer Online Game (MMOG) on individual achievement (pp. 1–199).
University of San Francisco.
Hestenes, D., Wells, M., & Swackhamer, G. (1992). Force concept inventory. The Physics
Teacher, 30, 141–151.
Huizinga, J. H. (1980). Homo ludens. Routledge.
Jackson, L. A., & Games, A. I. (2015). Video games and creativity. Video Games and
creativity (pp. 3–38). Academic Press.
ter Vrugte, J., de Jong, T., Vandercruysse, S., Wouters, P., van Oostendorp, H., & Elen, J.
(2017). Computer game-based mathematics education: Embedded faded worked
examples facilitate knowledge acquisition. Learning and Instruction, 50, 44–53.
Kapur, M. (2016). Examining productive failure, productive success, unproductive
failure, and unproductive success in learning. Educational Psychologist, 51(2),
289–299.
Kim, Y. J., & Shute, V. J. (2015). Opportunities and challenges in assessing and
supporting creativity in video games. In G. Green, & J. Kaufman (Eds.), Research
frontiers in creativity (pp. 100–121). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Kittel, J. E. (1957). An experimental study of the effect of external direction during
learning on transfer and retention of principles. Journal of Educational Psychology, 48,
391–405.
Leutner, D. (1993). Guided discovery learning with computer-based simulation games:
Effects of adaptive and non-adaptive instructional support. Learning and Instruction, 3
(2), 113–132.
Mayer, R. E. (1983). Can you repeat that? Qualitative effects of repetition and advance
organizers on learning from science prose. Journal of Educational Psychology, 75(1),
40.
Mayer, R. E. (2002). Multimedia learning. In Psychology of learning and motivation (Vol.
41, pp. 85–139). Academic Press.
Mayer, R. E. (2003). Learning and instruction. Prentice Hall.
Mayer, R. E. (2004). Should there be a three-strikes rule against pure discovery learning?
American Psychologist, 59(1), 14.
Mayer, R. E. (2014). Computer games for learning: An evidence-based approach. MIT Press.
Mayer, R. E., Hegarty, M., Mayer, S., & Campbell, J. (2005). When static media promote
active learning: Annotated illustrations versus narrated animations in multimedia
instruction. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Applied, 11(4), 256.
Melby-Lervåg, M., Redick, T. S., & Hulme, C. (2016). Working memory training does not
improve performance on measures of intelligence or other measures of “far transfer”
evidence from a meta-analytic review. Perspectives on Psychological Science, 11(4),
512–534.
Montessori, M. M., Jr. (1976). Education for human development: Understanding montessori.
New York: Schocken Books.
Moreno, R., & Mayer, R. E. (2000). A coherence effect in multimedia learning: The case
for minimizing irrelevant sounds in the design of multimedia instructional messages.
Journal of Educational Psychology, 92(1), 117.
Owen, A. M., Hampshire, A., Grahn, J. a, Stenton, R., Dajani, S., Burns, A. S., et al.
(2010). Putting brain training to the test. Nature, 465(7299), 775–778. https://doi.
org/10.1038/nature09042
Paas, F., & Sweller, J. (2014). Implications of cognitive load theory for multimedia
learning. The Cambridge handbook of multimedia learning, 27, 27–42.
Papert, S. (1980). Mindstorms: Children, computers, and powerful ideas. New York: Basic
Books.
Parchman, S. W., Ellis, J. A., Christinaz, D., & Vogel, M. (2000). An evaluation of three
computer-based instructional strategies in basic electricity and electronics training.
Military Psychology, 12(1), 73–87.
Parong, J., & Mayer, R. E. (2018). Learning science in immersive virtual reality. Journal
Of Educational Psychology, 110(6), 785.
Patall, E. A., Cooper, H., & Wynn, S. R. (2010). The effectiveness and relative importance
of choice in the classroom. Journal of Educational Psychology, 102(4), 896.
Piaget, J. (1972). Development and learning. Readings on the development of children.
Pilegard, C., & Mayer, R. E. (2016). Improving academic learning from computer-based
narrative games. Contemporary Educational Psychology, 44, 12–20.
Redick, T. S., Shipstead, Z., Harrison, T. L., Hicks, K. L., Fried, D. E., Hambrick, D. Z.,
et al. (2013). No evidence of intelligence improvement after working memory
training: A randomized, placebo-controlled study. Journal of Experimental Psychology.
General, 142(2), 359–379. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0029082
Rickards, J. P., & Di Vesta, F. J. (1974). Type and frequency of questions in processing
textual material. Journal of Educational Psychology, 66(3), 354–362.
Rotgans, J. I., & Schmidt, H. G. (2011). Situational interest and academic achievement in
the active-learning classroom. Learning and Instruction, 21(1), 58–67.
Rothkopf, E. Z. (1966). Learning from written instructive materials: An exploration of the
control of inspection behavior by test-like events. American Educational Research
Journal, 3(4), 241–249.
Sala, G., & Gobet, F. (2017). Does far transfer exist? Negative evidence from chess, music,
and working memory training. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 26(6),
515–520.
Schrader, C., & Nett, U. (2018). The perception of control as a predictor of emotional
trends during gameplay. Learning and Instruction, 54, 62–72.
Schwartz, D. L., Chase, C. C., Oppezzo, M. A., & Chin, D. B. (2011). Practicing versus
inventing with contrasting cases: The effects of telling first on learning and transfer.
Journal of Educational Psychology, 103, 759–775.

Acknowledgments
We wish to express our gratitude for the funding by the US Depart­
ment of Education (IES R305A170376) and the US National Science
Foundation (NSF #037988) for generously supporting this research. We
also want to thank Ginny Smith, Renata Kuba, Chih-Phu Dai, and Yeyu
Wang for their help with this project.
Appendix A. Supplementary data
Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.learninstruc.2021.101547.
References
Adams, D. M., Mayer, R. E., MacNamara, A., Koenig, A., & Wainess, R. (2012). Narrative
games for learning: Testing the discovery and narrative hypotheses. Journal of
Educational Psychology, 104(1), 235.
Bainbridge, K. (2019). The role of variety in the transfer of cognitive skills. UC Santa
Barbara): Doctoral dissertation.
Bainbridge, K., & Mayer, R. E. (2018). Shining the light of research on Lumosity. Journal
of Cognitive Enhancement, 2(1), 43–62.
Berney, S., & Bétrancourt, M. (2016). Does animation enhance learning? A metaanalysis. Computers & Education, 101, 150–167.
Blanco-Herrera, J. A., Gentile, D. A., & Rokkum, J. N. (2019). Video games can increase
creativity, but with caveats. Creativity Research Journal, 31(2), 119–131. https://doi.
org/10.1080/10400419.2019.1594524
Bransford, J. D., Brown, A. L., & Cocking, R. R. (2000). How people learn (Vol. 11).
Washington, DC: National academy press.
Bransford, J. D., & Schwartz, D. L. (1999). Rethinking transfer: A simple proposal with
multiple implications. Review of Research In Education, 24, 61–100.
Cameron, B., & Dwyer, F. (2005). The effect of online gaming, cognition and feedback
type in facilitating delayed achievement of different learning objectives. Journal of
Interactive Learning Research, 16(3), 243–258.
Clark, D. B., Tanner-Smith, E. E., & Killingsworth, S. S. (2016). Digital games, design, and
learning: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Review of Educational Research, 86
(1), 79–122.
Coller, B. D., & Scott, M. J. (2009). Effectiveness of using a video game to teach a course
in mechanical engineering. Computers & Education, 53(3), 900–912.
Csikszentmihályi, M. (1990). The domain of creativity. In M. A. Runco, & R. S. Albert
(Eds.), Theories of creativity: Vol. 115. Sage focus editions (pp. 190–212). Sage
Publications, Inc.
Deci, E. L., & Ryan, R. M. (2012). Self-determination theory. In P. A. M. Van Lange,
A. W. Kruglanski, & E. T. Higgins (Eds.), Handbook of theories of social psychology (pp.
416–436). Sage Publications Ltd.
DeRouin-Jessen, R. (2008). Electronic theses and dissertations. Unpublished manuscript.
In Game on: The impact of game features in computer-based training. Orlando, FL:
University of Central Florida.
Dweck, C. S. (2008). Mindsets and math/science achievement. New York, NY: Carnegie
Corp. of New York–Institute for Advanced Study Commission on Mathematics and
Science Education.
Fensham, P. J., & West, L. H. T. (1976). Prior knowledge or advance organizers as
effective variables in chemical learning. Journal of Research In Science Teaching, 13
(4), 297–306.
Ferguson, C. J., & Garza, A. (2011). Call of (civic) duty: Action games and civic behavior
in a large sample of youth. Computers in Human Behavior, 27(2), 770–775.
Fiorella, L., & Mayer, R. E. (2012). Paper-based aids for learning with a computer-based
game. Journal of Educational Psychology, 104(4), 1074–1082.
Gee, J. P. (2007). Good video games+ good learning: Collected essays on video games,
learning, and literacy. Peter Lang.
Green, C. S., & Bavelier, D. (2007). Action-video-game experience alters the spatial
resolution of vision. Psychological Science, 18(1), 88–94.
Green, C. S., & Bavelier, D. (2012). Learning, attentional control, and action video games.
Current Biology, 22(6), R197–R206.
Habgood, M. J., & Ainsworth, S. E. (2011). Motivating children to learn effectively:
Exploring the value of intrinsic integration in educational games. The Journal Of the
Learning Sciences, 20(2), 169–206.
Hanus, M. D., & Fox, J. (2015). Assessing the effects of gamification in the classroom: A
longitudinal study on intrinsic motivation, social comparison, satisfaction, effort,
and academic performance. Computers & education, 80, 152–161.

10

K. Bainbridge et al.

Learning and Instruction xxx (xxxx) xxx
Thorndike, E. L., & Woodworth, R. S. (1901). The influence of improvement in one
mental function upon the efficiency of other functions. II. The estimation of
magnitudes. Psychological Review, 8(4), 384.
Ventura, M., Shute, V., & Zhao, W. (2013). The relationship between video game use and
a performance-based measure of persistence. Computers & Education, 60(1), 52–58.
Vollmeyer, R., & Rheinberg, F. (2005). A surprising effect of feedback on learning.
Learning And Instruction, 15(6), 589–602.
Vosniadou, S., Ioannides, C., Dimitrakopoulou, A., & Papademetriou, E. (2001).
Designing learning environments to promote conceptual change in science. Learning
and Instruction, 11(4–5), 381–419.
Vygotsky, L. S. (1987). The development of scientific concepts in childhood. The collected
works of LS Vygotsky, 1, 167–241.
Wouters, P., & van Oostendorp, H. (2013). A meta-analytic review of the role of
instructional support in game-based learning. Computers & Education, 60(1),
412–425.
Wright, M. T. (2017). Paradox of the learning game: The promise and plight of video games
and learning. Philadelphia, PA: Design Meets Mind.
Young, M. F., Slota, S., Cutter, A. B., Jalette, G., Mullin, G., Lai, B., et al. (2012). Our
princess is in another castle: A review of trends in serious gaming for education.
Review of Educational Research, 82(1), 61–89.

Shute, V. J., Almond, R. G., & Rahimi, S. (2019). Physics playground (v 1.3 [Computer
software]. Tallahassee, FL: FSU: Public Domain. Retrieved from https://pluto.coe.
fsu.edu/ppteam/pp-links/.
Shute, V. J., Ke, F., Almond, R. G., Rahimi, S., Smith, G., & Lu, X. (2019). How to increase
learning while not decreasing the fun in educational games. Learning Science: Theory,
Research, and Practice, 327.
Shute, V. J., Rieber, L., & Van Eck, R. (2011). Games and learning. Trends and issues in
instructional design and technology, 3, 1–31.
Shute, V. J., Ventura, M., & Ke, F. (2015). The power of play: The effects of Portal 2 and
Lumosity on cognitive and noncognitive skills. Computers & education, 80, 58–67.
Shute, V. J., Ventura, M., & Kim, Y. J. (2013). Assessment and learning of qualitative
physics in Newton’s playground. The Journal of Educational Research, 106(6),
423–430.
Simons, D. J., Boot, W. R., Charbness, N., Gathercole, S. E., Chabris, C. F.,
Hambrick, D. Z., et al. (2016). Do brain training programs work? Psychological
Science in the Public Interest, 17(3), 103–186.
Singley, M. K., & Anderson, J. R. (1989). The transfer of cognitive skill (No. 9). Harvard
University Press.
Swaak, J., De Jong, T., & Van Joolingen, W. R. (2004). The effects of discovery learning
and expository instruction on the acquisition of definitional and intuitive knowledge.
Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, 20(4), 225–234.

11

