This is a portion of the eBook at doi:10.7551/mitpress/13375.001.0001

8
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE THINKING
IN K–­1 2
David S. Touretzky and Christina Gardner-­McCune

HISTORY OF THE FIVE BIG IDEAS IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE

The “Five Big Ideas in AI” were inspired by the 2017 CSTA (Computer
Science Teachers Association) Computer Science Standards, which are
organized around five big ideas in computing. Those five big ideas are:
(1) algorithms and programming, (2) computing systems, (3) data and
analysis, (4) impacts of computing, and (5) networks and the internet.
Unfortunately, although artificial intelligence (AI) is an important branch
of computer science, the standards contain only two sentences about AI,
both in the eleventh-­and twelfth-­grade band, as shown in figure 8.1.
Until recently, AI was considered too advanced for younger students.
The Five Big Ideas in AI are a way to introduce teachers, parents, and
students to the essential concepts and major issues of a field often confused with science fiction (Touretzky et al. 2019). We argue here that
studying AI can teach students about more than technology; it can help
them better appreciate the complexity of humanity.
Each of the Five Big Ideas is described by a key phrase and a one-­
sentence statement; see figure 8.2. In a poster we published in 2019, each
statement was unpacked in a paragraph of explanatory text. This poster
has since been translated into fourteen languages, including Chinese,
Korean, Hindi, Spanish, Portuguese, Hebrew, and Arabic, all available on

Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/oa-edited-volume/chapter-pdf/2243217/c005400_9780262368971.pdf by UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS PERMIAN BASIN

This is a portion of the eBook at doi:10.7551/mitpress/13375.001.0001

154	D. S. Touretzky and C. Gardner-­M cCune

Describe how artificial intellgence
drives many software and
> Algorithms & Algorithms Communicating
Programming
physical systems.
Implement an artificial intelligence
Algorithms &
algorithm to play a game against
>
Algorithms Creating
Programming
a human opponent or solve a
problem.
8.1 References to AI in the 2017 CSTA Computer Science Standards.

c
Al p
h
b ot

y
i
w n
ay
s.

<

5

T

IETAL IMP
AC
OC
S
-

a
t
ie
os n im
iti v p a c t s o c ti v e
e a n d n e ga

<

3 - LE

Com

puter

2-

<

Accuracy:
99.4%

maintain representatio
ents
ns
Ag
nd use them for re
rld a
a
s
on
wo
ing
the
.
TION &
of
R
E
A
SENTA
SO
PRE
NIN
RE
G

Object ID:
Human

<

ts require man
t agen
y ki
gen
nds
n
n
i
a
l
r
inte ct aturally with
el
o
Int dge to
hum f
e
l
a
ns
TURAL INTE
ow
4 - NA
RAC
.
kn
TIO
N

the world u
sing
erceive
rs p
sen
e
t
u
so
p
m
rs.
Co
EPTION
C
R
E
P
1-

A RNIN G

s can learn from

da t a

.

8.2 The Five Big Ideas in AI graphic from AI4K12​.­org.

Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/oa-edited-volume/chapter-pdf/2243217/c005400_9780262368971.pdf by UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS PERMIAN BASIN

This is a portion of the eBook at doi:10.7551/mitpress/13375.001.0001

Artificial Intelligence Thinking in K–­1 2

155

the Artificial Intelligence for K–­12 Students website (https://­www​.­AI4K12​
.­org). In the guidelines, each Big Idea is broken down into a set of concepts and skills that form the rows of a table called a grade band progression chart. The columns are the four grade bands, and the cells define
what students in that grade band should know about and be able to do
with that concept or skill. At the time of this writing, the draft grade
band progression chart for the first Big Idea, perception, has been released
for public comment and is currently undergoing revision. An excerpt is
shown in figure 8.3. The draft for the third Big Idea, learning, has also
been released.
The ordering of the Five Big Ideas progresses from narrow areas of low-­
level processing (perception) to broad, high-­level topics (societal impact).
But they are not meant to be covered in sequence. Some curriculum
developers have done this, such as ReadyAI’s “AI + ME” overview (ReadyAI
2019). But there are many other ways to survey AI, such as by examining
different application areas. A module on self-­driving cars could touch on
all five of the Big Ideas.

BIG IDEA #1: PERCEPTION

Big Idea #1, perception, says, “Computers perceive the world using sensors.” The initial guidelines for Big Idea #1 start with a discussion of
computer sensors, which connects with the computer science standards
for computer hardware (under Computer Systems), and a discussion of
human sensory capabilities, which naturally connects with human biology.
But sensing isn’t what this Big Idea is about.
The first major insight we want students to have is that perception is
more than sensing. Specifically, perception is the extraction of meaning
from sensory signals, using knowledge. An automatic door at a supermarket has a sensor, but it does not perceive anything. The signal from the
pressure pad or ultrasonic transducer is too impoverished to carry much
information, and the response of the door too simplistic to require any
“meaning” beyond the raw signal. We want students to understand that
not all devices exhibit intelligence. We would not be enjoying YouTube
videos of wildlife wandering through supermarket aisles if their automatic doors could properly perceive who (or what) was entering.

Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/oa-edited-volume/chapter-pdf/2243217/c005400_9780262368971.pdf by UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS PERMIAN BASIN

8.3 Part of the draft grade band progression chart for Big Idea #1, perception. The rows list concepts and skills; the columns are the four grade
bands.

This is a portion of the eBook at doi:10.7551/mitpress/13375.001.0001

Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/oa-edited-volume/chapter-pdf/2243217/c005400_9780262368971.pdf by UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS PERMIAN BASIN

This is a portion of the eBook at doi:10.7551/mitpress/13375.001.0001

Artificial Intelligence Thinking in K–­1 2

157

If the extraction of meaning from sensory signals requires knowledge,
what does that knowledge look like? In the case of speech perception, this
question leads to an examination of the many levels of language, starting
with articulatory gestures (the motions made by the tongue, lips, and vocal
tract), and progressing to phonology (sounds), morphology (word stems,
prefixes, and suffixes), prosody (stress and intonation), syntax (grammar),
and semantics (meaning). These are sophisticated concepts, but even young
children can discuss the phonetic inventory of their native language and
can understand why an intelligent agent like Siri or Alexa might have trouble understanding different accents or speech patterns.
The second major insight into perception we want students to come
away with is what we call the abstraction pipeline: the transformation from
signal to meaning takes place in stages, with increasingly abstract features and higher level knowledge applied at each stage. In the case of
speech this progression is inherent in the structure of language, and early
speech-­recognition systems actually implemented the pipeline as a collection of distinct modules proceeding from the raw acoustic signal to
phonemes, words, phrases, and meaning. In more recent systems based
on deep neural networks there are many more stages of processing, and
different types of knowledge co-­exist across multiple levels. But even in
these messier neural net implementations there is a general progression
from more local, signal-­based information to more global, meaning-­based
information as one moves through the layers.
Visual perception differs from speech perception in that language is
something produced by humans for the purpose of transmitting meaning,
while vision is concerned with constructing, meaning by sensing natural
phenomena such as reflection and occlusion. The abstraction pipeline for
vision starts with pixels and ends with 3-­D scenes, but what lies between
is a complex mix of edges, contours, boundaries, surfaces, parts, shadows, reflections, and objects. Marr (1982) called this the 2½-­D sketch. The
knowledge required to derive these representations is innate in humans
and not easily articulated explicitly in a computer program.
The abstraction pipeline is a wondrous thing. Information flows backward as well as forward: for example, knowledge of the vocabulary of a
language can influence the perception of ambiguous sounds, and knowledge about the shapes of objects can influence the interpretation of edges

Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/oa-edited-volume/chapter-pdf/2243217/c005400_9780262368971.pdf by UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS PERMIAN BASIN

This is a portion of the eBook at doi:10.7551/mitpress/13375.001.0001

158	D. S. Touretzky and C. Gardner-­M cCune

in a scene. Human perceptual processes are far from fully understood at
present. Studying how AI attempts to mimic these processes offers a new
route to appreciation of human perception.
How much of this can be conveyed in K–­12 is still an open question,
but at least the early stages of the pipeline can be exposed to students
through interactive demos. Low-­level vision can be illustrated by showing
the real-­time output of vertical and horizontal edge detectors (figure 8.4)
applied to webcam images. Low-­level auditory perception can be shown
with real-­time spectrograms (figure 8.5) and pitch trackers.

BIG IDEA #2: REPRESENTATION AND REASONING

Big Idea #2 states that “Agents maintain representations of the world and
use them for reasoning.” In computer science terms, representations are
data structures, and reasoning is performed by algorithms. But how can
the concept of representations be explained to children in the lower grades
who are not yet familiar with data structures? Maps are a good place to
Vertical edges
3x3 kernel
+1 0 –1
+1 0 –1
+1 0 –1

Horizontal edges

+1 +1 +1
0 0 0
–1 –1 –1
3x3 kernel
8.4 Edge detection is one of the first stages of computer vision. Vertical and horizontal
edges are detected by convolving 3×3 kernels with the image.

Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/oa-edited-volume/chapter-pdf/2243217/c005400_9780262368971.pdf by UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS PERMIAN BASIN

This is a portion of the eBook at doi:10.7551/mitpress/13375.001.0001

Artificial Intelligence Thinking in K–­1 2

159

8.5 Real-­time spectrogram of the first author saying, “Every child deserves to learn
about artificial intelligence.” The vertical axis is frequency; the horizontal axis is time;
shading indicates the amount of energy in that frequency band. (Created with https://­
creatability​.­withgoogle​.­com​/­seeing​-­music​.­)

start. Even young children can grasp the concept of a map being a representation of a place. They understand that the map is not the territory, that
maps abstract away many details, and that maps follow certain notational
conventions, such as the way that roads or buildings are depicted. Having
children construct a map of their house, their school, or their neighborhood brings these ideas home. Children can also appreciate that using a
map to plan a route is a kind of reasoning and that a self-­driving car must
be doing a similar kind of reasoning. Thus, using maps, representation, and
reasoning can be made accessible even in K–­2.
A good next step in exploring representation and reasoning, appropriate
for grades 3 through 5, is the decision tree. This can be introduced via the
“guess-­the-­animal” game, where the goal is to guess the animal a person
is thinking of by asking a series of yes-­or-­no questions, such as, “Does it
swim?” or “Does it fly?” The questions form the nonterminal nodes of a
binary tree, and the terminal nodes are the animals (figure 8.6). In playing

Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/oa-edited-volume/chapter-pdf/2243217/c005400_9780262368971.pdf by UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS PERMIAN BASIN

This is a portion of the eBook at doi:10.7551/mitpress/13375.001.0001

160	D. S. Touretzky and C. Gardner-­M cCune

First question

“Does it swim?”
No

Yes
Next question

Next question

“Does it have scales?”

“Does it fly?”
Yes

No

Yes

No

New question

“Does it have
feathers?”
Yes

No

8.6 Decision tree learning. (AI+ME: Big Idea 2—­Representation & Reasoning: How AI
Makes Choices. AI + Me Series. Pittsburgh, PA: ReadyAI, 2020. Used with permission.)

this simple game children encounter fundamental concepts in representation and reasoning that they will be exploring further for years to come.
First, the decision tree is drawn on the board so that everyone can follow the reasoning process. This introduces students to the notion of tree
structures and serves as a simple formalism for encoding knowledge. Second, the procedure for playing the game is formalized. One always starts
at the root node. Upon arriving at any nonterminal node, the student
must ask that node’s question and then follows either the “yes” or “no”
branch to reach the next node. Upon arriving at a terminal node, one
states the animal associated with that node and waits to see if the guess
is correct. Asking students to explain this procedure in their own words
prompts them to think about how the reasoning algorithm works.
Another valuable aspect of the guess-­the-­animal game is the procedure for growing the tree. If one reaches a terminal node and guesses

Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/oa-edited-volume/chapter-pdf/2243217/c005400_9780262368971.pdf by UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS PERMIAN BASIN

This is a portion of the eBook at doi:10.7551/mitpress/13375.001.0001

Artificial Intelligence Thinking in K–­1 2

161

“penguin,” but the correct answer is “octopus,” one has to obtain two
pieces of information: (1) what question distinguishes between a penguin
and an octopus, and (2) what is the correct answer for an octopus. The
decision tree can then be updated by replacing the “penguin” terminal
node with a nonterminal node containing the new question, “Does it
have feathers?” Penguin and octopus become its two children. Following
this procedure, especially when they choose the animals and questions
themselves, gives children a feeling for how human knowledge can be
encoded in a data structure, and how computers can learn.
A key insight we want students to have about this Big Idea is the interdependence of representation and reasoning. Reasoning algorithms need
something to reason with, and representations are pointless if we have no
way to put them to use. Consider the map example from earlier: the map
representation needs a path-­planning algorithm to find a route between
two locations. It’s also important to understand that representations are
not just the input to an algorithm, they may also be constructed by the
algorithm. The route constructed by the path planning algorithm is another
representation. Likewise, game playing programs need another common AI
representation, the search tree, to keep track of alternative moves as they
search for the move that will lead to a winning game. The search tree is
neither an input nor an output. It is constructed by the search algorithm
as it searches. We express the representation/reasoning duality as follows:
“Representation drives reasoning, and reasoning algorithms manipulate
representations.”
Older students can be introduced to a taxonomy of reasoning types to
help them understand the variety of ways AI is used to make decisions.
Classification and prediction (regression) problems are the most common applications of neural networks, although these problems can also
be approached symbolically. Combinatorial search is one of the oldest
parts of classical AI and still very important. Other reasoning approaches
include logical deduction and theorem proving, constraint satisfaction,
task planning, and numerical optimization. Some of these topics are too
advanced for K–­12, but it may be possible to provide a taste. For example,
doing inference by resolution theorem proving using first-­order predicate
calculus is a topic for undergraduates, but we might give students in 9–­12
a taste of logical inference by looking at how a computer can handle

Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/oa-edited-volume/chapter-pdf/2243217/c005400_9780262368971.pdf by UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS PERMIAN BASIN

This is a portion of the eBook at doi:10.7551/mitpress/13375.001.0001

162	D. S. Touretzky and C. Gardner-­M cCune

syllogisms, such as the classic “all men are mortal; Socrates is a man;
therefore Socrates is mortal.”

SYMBOLIC VS. FEATURE VECTOR REPRESENTATIONS

While much of the recent progress on the difficult problems of speech
recognition, computer vision, and machine translation has resulted from
advances in neural network technology, symbolic representations remain
important, as evidenced by the resources Google and other large corporations have devoted to constructing knowledge graphs (Noy et al. 2019).
The knowledge panel displayed on the right hand side of the screen in a
Google search for “Thomas Jefferson” or “kiwi fruit” is generated from the
Google knowledge graph. Hand-­crafted symbolic representations used in
classical AI are certainly easier to explain to children than the feature vector representations constructed by neural networks. But what should they
understand about feature vector representations? In the remainder of this
section we offer some speculation on how feature vector representations
may influence students’ views about word meanings.
Dictionaries and thesauruses are our traditional codifications of the
meaning of words. With six hundred thousand words spanning one thousand years of usage, the Oxford English Dictionary (OED) is a landmark intellectual achievement, billing itself as “the definitive record of the English
language” (Oxford University Press 2020). Dictionaries typically include
usage examples—­often famous quotations—­that help put words into context. The OED contains 3 million quotations. All of this material was compiled over many years by committees of scholars. Similar efforts exist for
other languages: for example, a special commission composed of members of the Académie Française produces the Dictionnaire de l’Académie
Française, endorsed by the French government. Dictionaries are important
cultural artifacts and are the original hand-­crafted symbolic representations of words. But it is not easy for a computer to reason with this type of
representation.
Computing technology has offered our culture a new type of word representation that now powers many natural language applications. This feature
vector encoding, also known as a word embedding, represents each word as a
point in a high-­dimensional abstract space. To understand this encoding it

Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/oa-edited-volume/chapter-pdf/2243217/c005400_9780262368971.pdf by UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS PERMIAN BASIN

This is a portion of the eBook at doi:10.7551/mitpress/13375.001.0001

Artificial Intelligence Thinking in K–­1 2

163

is helpful to first consider a less abstract example. The following is inspired
by the description of the word2vec family of models in Mikolov et al. (2013).
Suppose we want to represent the words “man,” “woman,” “boy,” “girl,”
“king,” “queen,” “prince,” and “princess.” Imagine a 3-­D space where the
x coordinate encodes gender, the y coordinate encodes age, and the z coordinate encodes royalty (figure 8.7). Each of our eight vocabulary words can
be mapped to a unique point in this space: for example, “man” might be
(0,1,0), and “princess” might be (1,0,1). Euclidean distance in this space
can serve as a heuristic for semantic similarity, allowing us to infer that
“man” is semantically closer to “woman” than to “princess.” We can go
on to embed additional words in this space, even without adding more
dimensions. “Son” would likely be close to “boy,” although less definitive
as to age, so perhaps its coordinates would be (0, 0.3, 0). “Parent” is gender
neutral but an adult, with no implication of royalty, so it might map to (0,
0.5, 0), and so on.

1.5
king

prince

1
Royalty

queen

princess

0.5
man
son
boy

0
–0.5

0

woman

1.5
1

child

0.5
Gender

parent

girl

0.5

Age

0
1

1.5

8.7 Representations of words as points in a 3-­D semantic space.

Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/oa-edited-volume/chapter-pdf/2243217/c005400_9780262368971.pdf by UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS PERMIAN BASIN

This is a portion of the eBook at doi:10.7551/mitpress/13375.001.0001

164	D. S. Touretzky and C. Gardner-­M cCune

Mikolov et al. (2013) showed that in addition to providing a similarity
heuristic, feature vector encodings admit a simple type of analogical reasoning by vector arithmetic. Subtracting the vector for “queen” (1,1,1) from the
vector for “woman” (1,1,0) yields a vector (0,0,-­1) that removes the royalty
attribute from a word. Adding this vector to “prince” (0,0,1) yields “boy”
(0,0,0). Adding it to “king” (0,1,1) yields “man” (0,1,0). Similarly, subtracting “man” from “boy” and adding the result to “parent” yields (0.5,0,0),
which is a plausible encoding for “child.”
Representing a larger vocabulary requires a higher-­dimensional feature
space. Rather than designing those features by hand, they can be created
using machine learning, specifically neural networks. We don’t have a
convenient way to train the network directly on word meanings, but since
words with similar meanings tend to occur in similar contexts, it turns out
that training the network to predict what words are likely to co-­occur with
a given word is an effective proxy for meaning. This approach captures
more than pure syntactic and semantic features; it also captures information about usage: for example, which adjectives are typically applied to
which nouns.
Unlike the carefully constructed dictionary definitions produced by
human experts, feature vector representations are somewhat arbitrary. They
depend on parameters such as the size of the context window (the number
of words before and after the word whose features are being learned), the
vocabulary set, the dimensionality of the feature space (number of units
in the neural network’s hidden layer), and the training corpus. Even if all
these parameters are held constant, two separate runs of the learning algorithm will produce different representations because of the randomness of
the network’s initial weights. Heuristics used for speed training also influence the vector representation. And these vectors are not easily interpretable by humans, although one can sometimes find correlations between
vector elements and semantic attributes by comparing the representations
of several words, as in figure 8.8.
Despite their lack of definitiveness, statistical feature vector representations have significant practical uses. For example, they can be used to
disambiguate homophones during real-­
time speech recognition. Tell a
chatbot you want “two coffees, not too hot, to go” and it will get every
word right. Neural machine translation systems use feature vectors as their

Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/oa-edited-volume/chapter-pdf/2243217/c005400_9780262368971.pdf by UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS PERMIAN BASIN

This is a portion of the eBook at doi:10.7551/mitpress/13375.001.0001

Artificial Intelligence Thinking in K–­1 2

“child”?

“human”?

woman
girl
boy
man
king

165

“non-royal”?

Scale
1.6
0.8
0.0
–0.8
–1.6

queen
water
8.8 Feature vector representations of words in word2vec. (Figure modified from Alammar 2019.)

input and output encodings, as do some question answering systems such
as Siri, and machine translation applications such as Google Translate.
There are already simple online demos that allow people to explore word2vec vocabularies and experiment with the analogy via vector arithmetic.
Demos that are friendlier to K–­12 users will surely follow. eCraft2Learn,
a children’s AI programming framework built on top of Snap!, recently
added blocks for working with feature vectors (Kahn and Winters 2020).
Allowing students to experiment on their own with feature vector representations is the twenty-­first-­century version of teaching them to explore
a dictionary: it will enrich their appreciation of language. It will also give
them insight into the workings of the AI systems they interact with in their
daily lives.

BIG IDEA #3: LEARNING

Big Idea #3 says “Computers can learn from data.” It’s important to distinguish human learning from what the computer is doing, so the guidelines begin with a comparison. Machine learning mostly follows one of
two approaches: finding patterns in data, or optimizing behavior based
on trial and error. Humans do those things too, but they also learn in
other ways, such as by being told, by observing others, by asking questions, by experimenting, and by making connections to past experience.
Human learning, because it is part of a larger cognitive architecture, is

Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/oa-edited-volume/chapter-pdf/2243217/c005400_9780262368971.pdf by UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS PERMIAN BASIN

This is a portion of the eBook at doi:10.7551/mitpress/13375.001.0001

166	D. S. Touretzky and C. Gardner-­M cCune

general and flexible, while machine learning is accomplished by specialized algorithms and focuses on performing a specific task.
Arthur Samuel, author of the first AI checkers playing program, is credited with coining the term machine learning in 1959. A definition often
attributed to Samuel is that machine learning is a “field of study that gives
computers the ability to learn without being explicitly programmed.” He
didn’t actually write those words, but they convey the gist of his thinking.1 Our take on this for the K–­12 audience is: “Machine learning allows
a computer to acquire behaviors without people explicitly programming
those behaviors.” Another way to think about it is that machine learning is
a way to construct a reasoner. So humans program the learning algorithm,
the learning algorithm constructs a reasoner with the desired behavior,
and the reasoner is then employed in some task such as recognizing cats
in images or deciding whether an email is spam.
One of the things we want students to be able to do is construct a reasoner themselves. Several tools allow children to train an image classifier
on small numbers of examples using deep neural networks and transfer
learning. Probably the best known tool is Google’s Teachable Machine,
which conveniently runs in the browser. The demo can use images captured from a laptop’s camera and doesn’t require any programming. Similar capabilities now exist in children’s programming frameworks, such as
App Inventor, Cognimates (based on Scratch), and eCraft2Learn (based
on Snap!). Using a tool like Teachable Machine, students can train a classifier to recognize a thumbs-­up gesture, a peace sign, and a “no gesture”
condition. They can then measure its accuracy on new images and experiment with adding more varied training examples to help it perform better. This makes a compelling educational experience for adults as well as
children. It’s a great way to approach machine learning, but it has some
limitations, which must be addressed through other activities.
To enhance their understanding of machine learning, we would like
students to experience what it feels like to acquire a concept by finding
patterns in data. The problem with training Teachable Machine to recognize cats or thumbs-­up gestures is that we start out already knowing those
concepts, even if the machine does not. Training a classifier on familiar concepts cannot help one experience what it’s like to be the trainee.

Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/oa-edited-volume/chapter-pdf/2243217/c005400_9780262368971.pdf by UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS PERMIAN BASIN

This is a portion of the eBook at doi:10.7551/mitpress/13375.001.0001

Artificial Intelligence Thinking in K–­1 2

167

To address this, the guidelines have students play the role of machine
learner for concepts they don’t already know.
This exercise can be done as early as in grades K–­2 by showing labeled
examples of cartoon creatures and asking students to figure out a rule
that predicts the labels. For example, the images could be of cartoon fish
of various colors, with different shaped heads, bodies, fins, and tails.
The labels could be “eats seaweed” and “doesn’t eat seaweed.” Labeled
instances would be presented one at a time, and after seeing a sufficient
number the students could begin positing what the pattern is that predicts a fish eating seaweed. A simple case would be that it’s the purple
fish that eat seaweed. More challenging cases may involve a conjunction
of features (only purple fish with pointy heads eat seaweed), or for older
students, a negated value (purple fish except those with small tails), a
disjunction of conjunctions (purple fish with pointy heads or orange fish
with small tails), or something even more complex.
In later grade bands, students are asked to simulate learning algorithms
in more detail. For example, in grades 3–­5, instead of verbally stating a
classification rule, they may be asked to construct a decision tree, where
each node tests a single feature such as color or head shape. In 9–­12 they
may be asked to train a classifier or predictor to fit a set of noisy training
points by turning knobs to adjust parameters, eyeballing the quality of the
fit. Such a model may predict a person’s height given their age, or the price
of a used car given its mileage. For a linear model y = mx + b, they would
adjust the slope (m) and intercept (b), but they could also train nonlinear
models such as logistic functions or cubic polynomials the same way.

CHANGES IN INTERNAL REPRESENTATIONS

Another insight we want students to have is, “Learning of new behaviors
is brought about by changes in internal representations.” In other words,
what the learning algorithm is doing is not magic; it is simply adjusting
a data structure. This is the second drawback to Teachable Machine and
similar transfer learning tools: they are black box demos whose internal
representations are unobservable. Given the complexity of deep neural
network representations, even if there were a practical way to display

Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/oa-edited-volume/chapter-pdf/2243217/c005400_9780262368971.pdf by UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS PERMIAN BASIN

This is a portion of the eBook at doi:10.7551/mitpress/13375.001.0001

168	D. S. Touretzky and C. Gardner-­M cCune

them, it’s not clear how their hidden layer activations could be made interpretable by non-­experts. There is, however, interesting work on giving
qualitative insights into what these networks are doing, such as displaying
which areas of a scene a network is attending to, or finding the optimal
stimulus for triggering a learned feature detector. As our methods for analyzing deep neural networks improve, the way we teach them will evolve.
For now, we advocate approaching “changes to internal representations,” using hand simulations of symbolic learning applications. We can
help students recognize that the decision trees they built in grades 3–­5
or the parameter values they adjusted in grades 9–­12 are the internal representations that learning algorithms manipulate. We can also draw on
some “glass box” machine learning tools that disclose their representations. For example, MachineLearningForKids allows students to construct
a classifier using decision tree learning, and a recent enhancement added
the ability to draw the decision tree. While the tree can be very complex
for multivariate datasets, such as the Titanic survivor data used as one of
the illustrative examples, for simpler data the tree is easily interpretable.
For exploring changes in neural net representations, Google’s TensorFlow Playground is an ideal tool. It allows students to train small feed-­
forward neural networks that are graphically displayed in the browser.
Every connection is explicitly represented and gets thicker or thinner as
the magnitude of the weight increases or decreases; the sign of the weight
determines its color. By hovering over a connection, students can read
the exact weight value. What we want students to appreciate is that the
weights constitute an internal representation of a set of feature detectors
that the learning algorithm (backpropagation) is incrementally adjusting. Exactly how those adjustments are calculated can be left to more
advanced classes. In deep neural networks, these feature detectors are
complex and hard to interpret, but for the shallow networks and simple
2-­D input patterns supported by TensorFlow Playground, it is possible to
exactly visualize what each feature detector is doing.

TYPES OF LEARNING

“Finding patterns in data” is a broad concept that encompasses both supervised learning, where the data are labeled, and unsupervised learning,

Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/oa-edited-volume/chapter-pdf/2243217/c005400_9780262368971.pdf by UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS PERMIAN BASIN

This is a portion of the eBook at doi:10.7551/mitpress/13375.001.0001

Artificial Intelligence Thinking in K–­1 2

169

where they are not. It can be used to produce both classifiers and predictors. Classification is a special case of prediction in which the output is
drawn from a discrete set (the class labels) rather than a continuous range.
The other type of machine learning covered in Big Idea #3, “learning from
experience,” involves something radically different.
In supervised learning the algorithm is provided with the correct answer
(the label) for every training example. All it has to do is adjust the internal
representations to make the model more likely to produce this answer. In
learning from experience, known as reinforcement learning, the algorithm
is only provided with a scalar value, the reinforcement signal, which indicates how well things are going. It is not told what it should do differently
to make things go better; it has to figure that out for itself.
The other reason reinforcement learning is radically different is that
reinforcement learning is used for sequential decision problems. While
classification and prediction are one-­shot problems where a single input
is mapped to a single output, sequential decision problems involve a
series of action choices, where each action affects the choices available
in the next step. An example would be playing a game like chess, where
each move constrains the choices available for the next move. We want
students to appreciate two things about reinforcement learning. First,
the computer is not being trained by a teacher; it is generating its own
data by making a choice at each step and seeing where that choice leads,
that is, how much reinforcement it ultimately receives. Computers that
have become expert game players through reinforcement learning generated their training data by playing against themselves. Second, because
we are not required to provide the algorithm with the correct answer at
each step, it is possible for the algorithm to discover solutions to problems in which we don’t know ourselves what would be the best choice
to make.
Reinforcement learning is worth teaching in K–­12 because it has led
to some significant achievements for AI, such as AlphaGo’s 2016 defeat
of world champion Go player Lee Sedol. But like deep neural networks,
the details of reinforcement learning algorithms are too complex for all
but the most advanced high school students. Hand-­simulating the algorithm would be tedious because of the large number of trials required
even for simple tasks. But tiny grid world simulations with only a handful

Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/oa-edited-volume/chapter-pdf/2243217/c005400_9780262368971.pdf by UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS PERMIAN BASIN

This is a portion of the eBook at doi:10.7551/mitpress/13375.001.0001

170	D. S. Touretzky and C. Gardner-­M cCune

of states and actions can provide a glimpse into how reinforcement learning works.
Some other topics covered in Big Idea #3 are the design of feature sets,
development and use of large datasets, and sources and effects of bias in
training data.

BIG IDEA #4: NATURAL INTERACTION

Big Idea #4 covers a range of topics relating to how computers interact with
people. The one-­sentence description reads: “Intelligent agents require many
kinds of knowledge to interact comfortably with humans.” The major topics that make up this Big Idea are natural language understanding, common
sense reasoning, affective computing, and consciousness/theory of mind.
Natural language understanding includes making sense of human requests
to intelligent agents, extracting information from text, and translating from
one language to another. Language is often syntactically ambiguous, so
finding the most likely meaning of a text requires some semantic analysis.
For example, “John saw the man from the restaurant” could mean either
that John was gazing out from the restaurant when he saw the man, or that
John saw the man who had some previous connection to the restaurant.
Further context is necessary to decide which meaning the speaker intended.
Speaking with an intelligent agent incapable of common sense reasoning would be tedious because everything would have to be spelled out in
detail. Common sense reasoning includes naive physics: understanding
the properties of solids and liquids and how they behave in response to
forces such as gravity. Winograd schema sentences such as, “The trophy
would not fit in the suitcase because it was too [large/small],” illustrate
how an understanding of naive physics, in this case volume and physical
containment, determines whether “it” refers to the trophy or the suitcase.
Another requirement for common sense reasoning is knowledge about
the world: for example, knowing that cats are living things, or what chairs
are used for. This also includes sociocultural knowledge, such as when to
pay at a restaurant, or what makes a good gift for a child.
Today’s AI systems show little common sense reasoning ability. Google
can translate text into over one hundred languages but can’t answer questions about a short story that a five-­year-­old would find trivial. AI systems

Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/oa-edited-volume/chapter-pdf/2243217/c005400_9780262368971.pdf by UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS PERMIAN BASIN

This is a portion of the eBook at doi:10.7551/mitpress/13375.001.0001

Artificial Intelligence Thinking in K–­1 2

171

try to make up for this deficiency by focusing on retrieval from huge
knowledge bases. But retrieval is not the same as inference. For example,
ask Google how much an alligator weighs, and it will answer five hundred
pounds. Ask how much an ostrich weighs, and it will say 250 pounds. But
ask it, “Does an alligator weigh more than an ostrich?” and, as of April
2021, it doesn’t even understand the question. Retrieval alone doesn’t
cut it—­usually. Sometimes it does. Ask Google, “Is Microsoft bigger than
IBM?” and it finds articles where people have discussed that question.
But ask it, “Is Intel bigger than Pfizer?” and it falls apart, despite the fact
that it can retrieve the number of employees and market capitalization
of these companies, either of which could be used to compare their size.
To achieve human-­like common sense reasoning would require something called Artificial General Intelligence, or AGI. One of the essential
understandings we want children to come away with is the difference
between the narrow AI reasoners we have today and the broad AGI reasoners depicted in science fiction. One way to drive this idea home is to try to
have a conversation with an intelligent agent such as Alexa or Siri. At present they do not maintain context from one utterance to another, so one
can’t have a meaningful discussion with them. AI developers are currently
working on this. Chatbots, which are more specialized than “agents” such
as Alexa, address the problem by relying on templates for common interactions such as inquiring about the availability of a product, or placing an
order. But if the conversation veers outside the anticipated scenarios, the
chatbot is lost. We want children to be aware of these limitations so that
they do not attribute more intelligence to an AI agent than it deserves.
A third topic in Big Idea #4 is affective computing, or recognizing and
dealing with human emotional states. This includes sensitivity to tone
of voice, facial expressions, and body language, and the ability to adjust
interaction style to effectively respond to indications of frustration, boredom, or excitement. If robot companions were as responsive as dogs to
our emotional states, they might truly capture our hearts.
The final topic in Big Idea #4 is consciousness and theory of mind. These
terms are normally addressed in university-­level philosophy courses. But
because today’s children are growing up with intelligent agents, and in
a culture filled with fictional robots with human-­like personas, they are
primed to appreciate questions about whether computers really do have

Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/oa-edited-volume/chapter-pdf/2243217/c005400_9780262368971.pdf by UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS PERMIAN BASIN

This is a portion of the eBook at doi:10.7551/mitpress/13375.001.0001

172	D. S. Touretzky and C. Gardner-­M cCune

minds, or could in principle have them. Concepts such as the Turing Test,
or Searle’s hypothetical Chinese room, can be introduced in high school,
and should be.

MORE PLAYING WITH LANGUAGE

We both enjoyed learning about sentence diagramming in school. In this
section we draw a connection between sentence diagramming and AI, specifically the question of how a natural language understander begins to
make sense of a sentence. We speculate that playing with AI language tools
may instill in future generations of students an appreciation for the formal
structure of language that we got from experimenting with diagramming.
Sentence diagramming was invented in the 1840s by Stephen W. Clark,
a rural New York schoolmaster, as a means of helping students learn to
“parse” (grammatically analyze) sentences (Florey 2012). The notation
was refined by Alonzo Reed and Brainerd Kellogg in 1877 into a form
that became widely used in nineteenth-­and twentieth-­century middle
and high schools. Diagramming is less frequently taught today and is not
included in the Common Core (Thomas 2014). English teachers argue
and research has shown that isolated direct grammar instruction does
not help students become more effective writers. Nonetheless, readers of
a certain age may have fond memories of learning to diagram sentences
(Florey 2006), perhaps because they were a first exposure to formal representations. Diagrams are also something like data structures, a fundamental concept in computer science.
Sentence diagrams are a simplified version of the syntax trees used in
modern linguistics to represent the syntactic structure of sentences. Diagrams use only a few graphical devices, mainly horizontal, vertical, and
diagonal lines, as in figure 8.9. Some of these devices serve multiple roles,
whereas syntax trees label every node with an unambiguous grammatical
class.
Some linguistic theories are phrased in terms of transformations on
tree structures: for example, a sentence in the active voice can be transformed into the passive voice by switching the subject and direct object
subtrees and modifying the verb phrase, so “John saw Mary” becomes

Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/oa-edited-volume/chapter-pdf/2243217/c005400_9780262368971.pdf by UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS PERMIAN BASIN

This is a portion of the eBook at doi:10.7551/mitpress/13375.001.0001

Artificial Intelligence Thinking in K–­1 2

173

As Gregor Samsa awoke one morning from uneasy dreams
he found himself transformed in his bed into a monstrous vermin.
Kafka, Metamorphosis
he

found

trans

form

himself

in

to

in

As

Gregor Samsa

ed

awoke
m

fr

on

in

om

or
n

e

g

vermin

bed
hi

s

dreams

a

m

on

st

ro

us

un

ea

sy

8.9 Diagramming a sentence. (Courtesy of Pop Chart Labs.)

“Mary was seen by John.” Ambiguous sentences such as “John saw the
man with a telescope” are compatible with multiple tree structures, for
example, one in which “with a telescope” is attached to “saw,” and one
in which it is attached to “man.”
AI systems must parse sentences in order to understand them. While
syntactic analysis is only one part of language understanding, it is an essential component. The widespread availability of natural language parsers
presents an opportunity to introduce students to grammar in a new way:
by having them experiment with automated parsers. Figure 8.10 shows
a parse tree provided by the online demo page for the Berkeley Neural
Parser.2
Figure 8.11 shows the same parse in traditional syntax tree notation.
Students could learn to draw syntax trees by comparing their efforts to
computer-­constructed syntax trees like the ones shown here. They could
explore the topic of syntactic ambiguity by constructing sentences and seeing if the parser generates more than one parse tree. And they could learn
to write simple rules in a phrase structure grammar and see those rules used
to generate parse trees (whose terminal nodes form sentences) by iterative
expansion of nonterminal nodes. With a well-­designed graphical interface
to manage the rules, and automatic generation of many examples from

Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/oa-edited-volume/chapter-pdf/2243217/c005400_9780262368971.pdf by UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS PERMIAN BASIN

This is a portion of the eBook at doi:10.7551/mitpress/13375.001.0001

174	D. S. Touretzky and C. Gardner-­M cCune

S
Gregor Samsa awoke one morning from uneasy dreams
NP

VP

Gregor Samsa

awoke one morning from uneasy dreams

NNP

NNP

VBD

NP

PP

Gregor

Samsa

awoke

one morning

from uneasy dreams

CD

NN

IN

NP

one

morning

from

uneasy dreams
JJ

NNS

uneasy

dreams

8.10 Parse tree produced by the Berkeley Neural Parser (https://­parser​.­kitaev​.­io). NP
indicates a noun phrase, VP a verb phrase, and PP a prepositional phrase.

S

VP

NP

NNP
Gregor

NNP
Samsa

VBD
awoke

NP

PP

CD

NN

IN

one

morning

from

NP

JJ

NNS

uneasy

dreams

8.11 Traditional syntax tree notation, also from the Berkeley Neural Parser.

Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/oa-edited-volume/chapter-pdf/2243217/c005400_9780262368971.pdf by UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS PERMIAN BASIN

This is a portion of the eBook at doi:10.7551/mitpress/13375.001.0001

Artificial Intelligence Thinking in K–­1 2

175

the current rule set, students would have a grammar “sandbox” in which
to explore syntax and the relationship between parsing and generation.
The linguist Mark Liberman has remarked that because of diagramming
instruction, “grammar-­school children of the 19th century learned more
about linguistic analysis than most graduate students in English departments do today” (Liberman 2012). Interactive language tools designed specifically for K–­12 could remedy that.
What about semantics? Modern AI has leveraged statistical learning
over large datasets to construct practically useful natural language tools
for tasks such as machine translation or text summarization. These tools
use heuristics to resolve ambiguity from local context. The approach is a
powerful one but does not achieve true “understanding” in the human
sense, as evidenced by the limitations these systems still exhibit. For example, given “John saw the man with binoculars,” the Berkeley Neural Parser
attaches “with binoculars” to “man,” while most humans would prefer
“saw.” But given “John easily saw the man with binoculars,” the Berkeley
Neural Parser attaches “with binoculars” to “saw.” It’s not just the presence
of “easily” that changes the attachment, because given “John easily saw
the man with groceries,” the prepositional phrase attaches to “man,” as it
should. The interaction of the noun with the adverb to influence attachment is not the result of some explicitly formulated rule, nor is it the result
of commonsense reasoning. Rather it reflects the statistics of the corpus
the model was trained on, captured in a deep neural network. Another
example is the parser makes different but plausible attachment choices for
“John saw the man with one eye” (attached to “saw”) versus “John saw the
man with one leg” (attached to “man”). But it does not do so well on “John
saw the man with one ear.” Statistics can only get you so far.
One way students can explore machine understanding of language
is by comparing how AI parsers resolve ambiguous sentences with their
own preferred interpretations of those sentences, as we’ve done above.
It’s even more fun than sentence diagramming.

BIG IDEA #5: SOCIETAL IMPACT

Big Idea #5 is that “AI can impact society in both positive and negative
ways.” We want students to be aware of these potential impacts, especially

Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/oa-edited-volume/chapter-pdf/2243217/c005400_9780262368971.pdf by UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS PERMIAN BASIN

This is a portion of the eBook at doi:10.7551/mitpress/13375.001.0001

176	D. S. Touretzky and C. Gardner-­M cCune

since there is so much apprehension today about AI putting people out
of work, enabling unprecedented levels of government surveillance, or
unleashing killer robots on the world. All of those things are likely to happen to some extent. But there are also many benefits to be realized from AI,
such as improved medical diagnoses and treatment, faster drug discovery,
robotic assistance for disabled or elderly persons, increased productivity
in industry, and personalized instruction for learners of all ages. Students
need to be shown a balanced picture.
We’ve listed four subtopics for this Big Idea: (1) ethics of AI making
decisions about people, (2) economic impacts of AI technology, (3) AI and
culture, and (4) AI for social good.
A great deal of attention has been paid to bias in AI-­powered systems.
One source of bias results from training a system on an unrepresentative dataset: for example, a face-­recognition engine expected to work for
everyone but that was trained primarily on Caucasian faces. A trickier
problem is automated decision-­making systems found to treat different
groups of people unequally based on criteria we do not consider appropriate. People don’t set out to build systems that discriminate based on
race or gender. They may even withhold that information from the AI
system in an attempt to ensure neutrality. But race and gender correlate
with other variables and so can be implicitly present. The problem is that
machine learning systems trained on data that are unbalanced for historical reasons can acquire biases that perpetuate these imbalances because
they want to correctly predict the training data. A famous example is
Amazon using information from past technical hiring decisions to train
a system for screening resumes only to find that it had learned to assign
negative values to keywords that correlate with being female (Dastin
2018).
An important message for students to hear is that it is possible to take
steps to mitigate the negative impacts of technology. Face recognition
engines can be required to undergo testing to ensure that they perform
equally well for all populations. Automated decision-­making systems,
whether AI-­powered or not, can be required by regulation to be transparent in their reasoning and can be explicitly tested for disparate treatment
of protected groups based on inappropriate criteria.

Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/oa-edited-volume/chapter-pdf/2243217/c005400_9780262368971.pdf by UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS PERMIAN BASIN

This is a portion of the eBook at doi:10.7551/mitpress/13375.001.0001

Artificial Intelligence Thinking in K–­1 2

177

ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE AND CULTURE

Until recently, AI’s contributions to popular culture have been entirely
through science fiction. Speculation about possible futures remains an
engaging pastime: will we be happily coexisting with R2D2 and Lieutenant Data, or fleeing the Terminator? Instilling a basic understanding of
AI helps students recognize that neither scenario is imminent. But now,
actual AI applications are appearing in popular culture. Intelligent assistants modeled after Siri and Alexa are showing up in commercials and TV
show episodes. Radio station promos advise listeners to “tell Alexa to play
your favorite AM station.” Meanwhile, children’s interactions with Alexa
have sparked a debate about whether they should be taught to treat intelligent agents with politeness (Elgan 2018). As Elgan observes, “Preparing
kids for the future means more than mere manners. It means teaching
them to appreciate the difference between real human people and mere
machines designed to create the illusion of humanity.”
We will soon have many more humble robots in our lives. Shelf-­
scanning robots are appearing in department stores and supermarkets,
small-­item delivery robots are trundling the halls of hospitals and high-­
end hotels, and food and package delivery robots are beginning to share
the sidewalk with pedestrians. There is already a new genre of YouTube
videos showing mishaps with self-­driving cars. Today’s children will grow
up in a culture where we routinely share our living space with machines
that, although not very bright, can navigate effectively through the world.
iRobot founder Colin Angle reported that 90% of Roomba owners named
their vacuums (Barker 2018). How will they respond to robots that can
see and hear?

CONCLUSION

In recent years there have been concerted efforts to introduce children
to “computational thinking” (Wing 2006), including its four cornerstone
concepts of problem decomposition, pattern recognition, abstraction,
and algorithms. ISTE (the International Society for Technology in Education) and CSTA offer a joint operational definition of computational
thinking (CT, ISTE 2011) that includes five dispositions or attitudes:
(1) confidence in dealing with complexity, (2) persistence in working

Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/oa-edited-volume/chapter-pdf/2243217/c005400_9780262368971.pdf by UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS PERMIAN BASIN

This is a portion of the eBook at doi:10.7551/mitpress/13375.001.0001

178	D. S. Touretzky and C. Gardner-­M cCune

with difficult problems, (3) tolerance for ambiguity, (4) ability to deal with
open ended problems, and (5) ability to communicate and work with others to achieve a common goal or solution.
AI thinking implicitly draws upon the core concepts and dispositions
of CT. The Big Ideas of perception, reasoning, and learning are all realized
as algorithms, while representations are examples of abstraction. And
introducing students to AI topics such as the richness of language or the
subtleties of visual understanding asks them to grapple with problems
that are complex, difficult, ambiguous, and open ended. But AI thinking
also goes beyond classical CT in this sense: it asks students to consider that
computation can actually be thinking. Not in the fully human, “strong
AI” sense that Turing envisioned in his seminal paper on machine intelligence (Turing 1950), but at least in the specialized, narrow form known
today as “weak AI.” CT is exactly what humans need when they try to
understand how machines can think.
These are the early days of K–­12 AI education. It’s a dynamic area that
is developing rapidly. Here is what we see at the frontier:
•

New tools and demos are coming online, making it easier to give students hands-­on experiences with AI technologies. Since many of these
tools run in the browser, they are accessible even to low-­resource schools.

•

As more states adopt standards mandating computing instruction
for all K–­12 students, programming is making its way into the lower
grades, which means students will be more computationally sophisticated when they learn about AI.

•

AI professional development opportunities for teachers will begin to
have an impact. Computer science in general is poorly represented in
the schools: many computing teachers have no formal computer science training. Even so, they at least understand how a digital computer
works and have elementary programming skills. But few of these teachers claim to know anything about AI, or can even define it. Over the
next few years we hope to see AI become more integrated into computing curricula and teachers become more confident about introducing AI
topics in their classes.

•

AI technologies continue to progress. Intelligent agents are becoming better conversationalists. Robot companions that are not vacuum
cleaners will find a niche where they can be successful, while robots in

Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/oa-edited-volume/chapter-pdf/2243217/c005400_9780262368971.pdf by UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS PERMIAN BASIN

This is a portion of the eBook at doi:10.7551/mitpress/13375.001.0001

Artificial Intelligence Thinking in K–­1 2

179

the workplace become common. Fully autonomous, go-­anywhere self-­
driving cars are probably still two decades away, but less demanding
applications such as freight hauling or fixed-­route shuttle services are
already being deployed. As AI becomes a larger part of our lives and
culture, the need to demystify AI in K–­12 will be widely recognized.

NOTES

1. See https://­datascience​.­stackexchange​.­com​/­questions​/­37078​/­source​-­of​-­arthur​-­sam
uels-definition-of-machine-learning​.
2. Try the Berkeley Neural Parser at https://­parser​.­kitaev​.­io​/­​.
REFERENCES

Alammar, Jay. 2019. “The Illustrated Word2vec.” http://­jalammar​.­github​.­io​/­illustrated​
-­word2vec​/­​.
Barker, Colin. 2018. “Automation: How iRobot’s Roomba Vacuum Cleaner Became Part
of the Family.” ZDNet​.­com, June 15, 2018. https://­www​.­zdnet​.­com​/­article​/­automation​
-­how​-­irobots​-­roomba​-­vacuum​-­cleaner​-­became​-­part​-­of​-­the​-­family​/­​.
Computer Science Teachers Association (CSTA). 2017. “CSTA K12 Computer Science
Standards, Revised 2017.” https://­www​.­csteachers​.­org​/­standards​.
Dastin, Jeffrey. 2018. “Amazon Scraps Secret AI Recruiting Tool that Showed Bias
against Women.” Reuters, October 9, 2018.
Elgan, Mike. 2018. “The Case against Teaching Kids to Be Polite to Alexa.” Fast
Company, June 24, 2018. https://­www​.­fastcompany​.­com​/­40588020​/­the​-­case​-­against​
-­teaching​-­kids​-­to​-­be​-­polite​-­to​-­alexa​.
Florey, Kitty Burns. 2006. Sister Bernadette’s Barking Dog: The Quirky History and Lost
Art of Diagramming Sentences. New York: Melville House.
Florey, Kitty Burns. 2012. “A Picture of Language.” New York Times, March 26, 2012.
International Society for Technology in Education (ISTE) and the Computer Science
Teachers Association (CSTA). 2011. “Operational Definition of Computational Thinking for K–­12 Education.” https://­cdn​.­iste​.­org​/­www​-­root​/­ct​-­documents​/­computational​
-­thinking​-­operational​-­definition​-­flyer​.­pdf​.
Kahn, Ken, and Niall Winters. 2020. “A Guide to AI Extensions to Snap!” https://­
ecraft2learn​.­github​.­io​/­ai​/­, chapter 5, “Working with Words and Language.”
Liberman, Mark. 2012. “Diagrammatic Excitement.” Language Log, March 27, 2012.
https://­languagelog​.­ldc​.­upenn​.­edu​/­nll​/­​?­p=3868​.
Marr, David. 1982. Vision. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/oa-edited-volume/chapter-pdf/2243217/c005400_9780262368971.pdf by UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS PERMIAN BASIN

This is a portion of the eBook at doi:10.7551/mitpress/13375.001.0001

180	D. S. Touretzky and C. Gardner-­M cCune

Mikolov, Tomas, Ilya Sutskever, Kai Chen, Greg Corrado, and Jeffrey Dean. 2013.
“Distributed Representations of Words and Phrases and Their Compositionality.”
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 26: 3111–­3119. https://­dl​.­acm​.­org​
/­doi​/­10​.­5555​/­2999792​.­2999959​.
Noy, Natasha, Yuqing Gao, Anshu Jain, Anant Narayanan, Alan Patterson, and
Jamie Taylor. 2019. “Industry-­Scale Knowledge Graphs: Lessons and Challenges.”
Communications of the ACM 62 (8), 36–­43. https://­doi​.­org​/­10​.­1145​/­3331166​.
Oxford University Press. 2020. The Oxford English Dictionary. https://­www​.­oed​.­com​.
ReadyAI. 2019. “AI+ME.” https://­edu​.­readyai​.­org​/­courses​/­aime​/­​.
ReadyAI. 2020. AI+ME: Big Idea 2—­Representation & Reasoning: How AI Makes Choices.
AI + Me Series. Pittsburgh, PA: ReadyAI.
Thomas, Paul L. 2014. “Diagramming Sentences and the Art of Misguided Nostalgia.” https://­radicalscholarship​.­wordpress​.­com​/­2014​/­08​/­24​/­diagramming​-­sentences​
-­and​-­the​-­art​-­of​-­misguided​-­nostalgia​/­​.
Touretzky, David, Christina Gardner-­McCune, Fred Martin, and Deborah Seehorn.
2019. “Envisioning AI for K–­12: What Should Every Child Know about AI?” In Proceedings of the Thirty-­Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-­19). Palo
Alto, CA, 9795–­9799. https://­doi​.­org​/­10​.­1609​/­aaai​.­v33i01​.­33019795​.
Turing, A. M. 1950. “Computing Machinery and Intelligence.” Mind, LIX (236):
433–­460. https://­doi​.­org​/­10​.­1093%2Fmind%2FLIX​.­236​.­433​.
Wing, Jeannette M. 2006. “Computational Thinking.” Communications of the ACM
49 (3), 33–­35. https://­doi​.­org​/­10​.­1145​/­1118178​.­1118215​.

Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/oa-edited-volume/chapter-pdf/2243217/c005400_9780262368971.pdf by UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS PERMIAN BASIN

This is a section of doi:10.7551/mitpress/13375.001.0001

Computational Thinking Education in
K–12
Artificial Intelligence Literacy and Physical
Computing
Edited by: Siu-Cheung Kong, Harold Abelson
Citation:
Computational Thinking Education in K–12: Artificial Intelligence
Literacy and Physical Computing
Edited by: Siu-Cheung Kong, Harold Abelson
DOI: 10.7551/mitpress/13375.001.0001
ISBN (electronic): 9780262368971
Publisher: The MIT Press
Published: 2022

The open access edition of this book was made possible by
generous funding and support from The MIT Press Frank
Urbanowski Memorial Fund

Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/oa-edited-volume/chapter-pdf/2243217/c005400_9780262368971.pdf by UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS PERMIAN BASIN

MIT Press Direct

© 2022 Massachusetts Institute of Technology
This work is subject to a Creative Commons CC-­BY-­ND-­NC license.
Subject to such license, all rights are reserved.

The MIT Press would like to thank the anonymous peer reviewers who provided
comments on drafts of this book. The generous work of academic experts is essential
for establishing the authority and quality of our publications. We acknowledge
with gratitude the contributions of these otherwise uncredited readers.
This book was set in Stone Serif and Avenir LT Std by Westchester Publishing
S­ ervices.
Library of Congress Cataloging-­in-­Publication Data
Names: Kong, Siu Cheung, editor. | Abelson, Harold, editor.
Title: Computational thinking education in K-12 : artificial intelligence
literacy and physical computing / edited by Siu-Cheung Kong and Harold
Abelson.
Description: Cambridge, Massachusetts ; London, England : The MIT Press,
[2022] | Includes bibliographical references and index.
Identifiers: LCCN 2021035151 | ISBN 9780262543477 (Paperback)
Subjects: LCSH: Critical thinking—Study and teaching. | Computer
literacy—Study and teaching. | Artificial intelligence—Educational
applications.
Classification: LCC LB1590.3 .C655 2022 | DDC 371.33—dc23/eng/20211213
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2021035151

Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/oa-edited-volume/chapter-pdf/2243217/c005400_9780262368971.pdf by UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS PERMIAN BASIN

