Constructionism, Ethics, and Creativity: Developing Primary and Middle School
Artificial Intelligence Education
Safinah Ali* , Blakeley H. Payne* , Randi Williams* , Hae Won Park , Cynthia Breazeal
* authors contributed equally to this work
MIT Media Lab, Cambridge, MA 02139
{safinah, blakeley, randiw12, haewon, cynthiab}@media.mit.edu
Abstract

2

Background

Children growing up in the era of artificial intelligence (AI) will have a fundamentally different relationship with technology than those before them.
As AI changes how we live, work, and play this
raises the critical question, ”How do we best prepare students to flourish in the era of AI?”
In order to create a future where a diverse and inclusive citizenry can participate in the development
of the future of AI, we are developing powerful K12 AI education curricula that emphasize constructionist learning, designing with ethics in mind, and
developing a creative mindset. Children will need
all of these skills to thrive in the AI era. Here, we
describe the tools we created and studies we conducted to build curricula that embody these core
principles.

2.1

Artificial Intelligence Education

There are a number of commercial and research platforms
for children’s computational thinking. However, the majority of these platforms do not teach children about big ideas
in AI such as how computers perceive the world, represent
knowledge, reason and learn about the world, [Touretzky et
al., 2019]. Within the past three years, only a few platforms
have emerged that focus on teaching AI to grade school children. Most of these are for advanced high school students
and none are designed for children younger than 7. These
platforms and curricula include Cognimates, Machine Learning for Kids, Calypso for Cozmo, ReadyAI’s AI-in-a-Box,
Snap! AI Extensions, and Teachable Machine [Lane, 2018;
Druga, 2018; Touretzky and Gardner-McCune, 2018; Kahn
et al., 2018; Google, 2018]. These platforms leverage existing AI engines to enable children to do hands-on projects.
However, none intentionally teach ethics or encourage creative mindsets. To our knowledge, we are the first to develop
curricula that do both of these things and are accessible to
young children.

2.2

Figure 1: To learn about AI, children trained and interacted with
robots like Jibo (left) and PopBots (right).

1

Introduction

Over the past several years, we have seen the revolution of
many industries due to rapid adoption of artificial intelligence
(AI) in services and products. It is imperative that formal K12 education prioritize AI literacy and teaching children to
leverage AI and creativity to solve problems [Zimmerman,
2018]. All children should be able to identify examples of AI
in their world, grasp how common AI algorithms function,
use these algorithms to solve problems meaningful to them,
and evaluate the impact of AI systems on society. This paper
describes the K-8th grade curricula we have developed and
evaluated toward enabling children to understand AI, learn
about ethics, and think creatively.

AI + Ethics Education

It is imperative from an economic and justice standpoint that
children understand AI and can build their own projects with
it. However, focusing solely on the technical aspects of AI
and machine learning is not enough. Researchers have shown
that prominent machine learning algorithms, often advertised as “neutral” or “objective” systems, to be biased against
women, people of color, and low-income individuals [Buolamwini and Gebru, 2018; O’Neil, 2016]. For this reason,
many researchers and professors have argued that ethics must
be taught in situ with undergraduate and graduate technical
curricula [Skirpan et al., 2018]. Similarly, we believe that we
must train the next generation of technologists to see AI not
only as a tool, but also a technolgoy of ethical and societal
import.
Preteen students are typically developmentally ready to
grapple with ethics and moral reasoning. Kohlberg’s Theory
of Moral Development asserts that children between the ages
of 10 and 13 children are capable of reasoning about conformity, authority, social order, and reciprocity [Kohlberg and
Hersh, 1977]. To our knowledge, we are the first to develop
curricula to teach AI primarily through the lens of ethics.

2.3

Fostering Creativity in School

Children not only need to understand how AI works, but also
be able to think creatively about how they want it to work.
In computational thinking and AI education, students are
constantly problem-solving. This increases the importance
of fostering children’s ability to think creatively. However,
in 1968, Torrance found that students’ creativity across the
globe begins to decline around age 6, and slumps further in
the fourth grade [Torrance, 1968]. One suggested reason for
this slump is overly-structured school curricula and lack of
play based learning activities in educational practices [AlvesOliveira et al., 2017; Guilford, 1950].
We define creativity as the ability to generate ideas that
have novelty, highlight new and different themes, and value,
boost problem solving [Boden, 2004]. We seek to help
children develop a creative mindset through interaction with
a robot. Robots are increasingly being used in education,
and have shown to be effective tutors and learning companions [Belpaeme et al., 2018]. Social robots, in particular,
have previously been used as learning tools to foster positive
learning behaviors, such as curiosity [Gordon et al., 2015;
Park et al., 2017], growth mindset [Park et al., 2017], grit,
persistence, and attentiveness [Belpaeme et al., 2018]. In
some of these studies, this is accomplished by having the
robot model the desired behavior. For example, Park demonstrated how a robot exhibiting curiosity and a growth mindset
can leads to children demonstrating these behaviors in later
tasks [Park et al., 2017]. In our work, we explore if a robot exhibiting creative thinking can help foster creativity as a learning behavior in young children.

3

Constructionism: PopBots

PopBots, previously described in the literature, is the first
robotic toolkit developed for children ages 4-6 to learn about
AI [Williams et al., 2019b; Williams et al., 2019a]. Figure
1(right) shows the social robot learning companion embodied by a mobile phone (for the robot’s socially expressive
face) and LEGO blocks (for the robot’s body, sensors and motors). The social robot serves as both a programmable artifact
and a guide that steps students through AI algorithms, teaching them about AI through social interaction. The PopBots
curriculum uses creative learning activities to teach students
three AI concepts: knowledge-based systems, generative AI,
and supervised machine learning.
These activities, using the interfaces in Figure 2, build off
of the constructionist pedagogy: hands-on and project-based
learning that allows children freedom to explore. Children
learned knowledge-based systems by teaching the robot the
rules of rock, paper, scissors and then playing against it. They
learned generative AI by setting pitch and tempo parameters
to define musical emotions, like excited music is fast in tempo
and high in pitch. Then, children had the robot remix music in
different emotional styles. Supervised machine learning was
illustrated by having students develop training and test sets to
teach the robot to differentiate healthy and unhealthy foods.
We evaluated the PopBots curriculum with 80 Pre-K and
Kindergarten students who had no prior AI or programming
experience. They spent four sessions working through each

Figure 2: Interfaces for PopBots AI activities. a) Interface for telling
the robot which moves beat which in rock, paper scissors. b) Interface for defining the tempo and pitch parameters for emotional music remixes. c) Interface for labelling foods as healthy or unhealthy.

of the PopBots activities then completing an AI post-test.
We found that the curriculum was effective for helping children understand AI. The median score on the 10 question AI
assessment was 70%. Developmental factors like age and
Theory of Mind skills often made a difference in what children understood. There was a slight difference between PreK (Median= 63.3%) and Kindergarteners (Median= 70.0%).
This suggests that a further improvement to this system would
personalize more to each child’s developmental stage.

4

Ethics: AI + Ethics Curriculum

Building on the constructionist pedagogy of PopBots, we developed hands-on, largely unplugged, AI activities to teach
middle schoolers about the ethical ramifications of AI. The
AI + Ethics Curriculum consists of three lessons.
The first lesson introduces AI, datasets, supervised machine learning, and the notion of algorithmic bias. Using
Google’s Teachable Machine [Google, 2018], students train
a cat-dog classifier with two datasets: first, a biased dataset
where cats are over-represented, and a second with equal, diverse representation between both dogs and cats. Students
then compare accuracy between the classifiers and discuss
which outcome is fairer. This activity leads into a discussion
about a video highlighting the occurrence of bias in facial
recognition algorithms [Buolamwini and Gebru, 2018].
The second lesson introduces two concepts of Cathy
O’Neil’s: algorithms as opinions and stakeholder analysis using an ethical matrix, as in 3 [Hanna Gunn, 2019]. First, students develop an algorithm for making the “best” peanut butter and jelly sandwich. After which, students discuss what is
meant by “best”: is it the most delicious, the healthiest, the
quickest to make? The discussion transitions to stakeholders
in their PB&J: perhaps the child eating the sandwich, their
parent, their doctor or dentist, and even a grocer who supplies
different varieties of peanut butter.
The third and final lesson culminates in a paper prototyping
activity shown in Figure 4 where students redesign YouTube’s
recommender system by first identifying stakeholders in the

5

Creativity: Droodle Creativity Game

Given the foundation of the robot toolkit and activities that
help children learn about AI, we then explored the role that
a social robotic peer can play in helping children think creatively by modeling creative behavior. We developed an interactive game inspired from the Droodle Creativity Task [Severson et al., 2005; Ali et al., 2019]. Within this game, children collaborate with Jibo (Figure 1, left), a social robot that
expresses verbal and non-verbal patterns of artificial creativity.
Figure 3: An example of a student’s ethical matrix around
YouTube’s recommendation system. The student identified stakeholders and potential values those stakeholders might have. Using
this analysis, students determined that their recommendation algorithm should prioritize age-appropriateness as this would increase
children viewership and increase profit.

system, identifying the values of those stakeholders, and then
using an ethical matrix to determine what the goal of their
version of YouTube’s recommendation algorithm should be.

Figure 5: The child and the robot play the Droodle game collaboratively. The Droodles are displayed on the Android tablet. The tablet
communicates the current Droodle ID and titles to the robot.

Figure 4: A paper prototype of “age appropriate YouTube.” Students
included visible parental controls as well as multiple recommended
feeds with clear goals for users to choose between (e.g. an algorithm
that recommends longer videos as opposed to an algorithm that prioritizes educational content).

In the game, the child and the robot take turns coming up
with titles for a simple, abstract drawing, called a Droodle,
displayed on a tablet as in Figure 5. The Droodle Task coding
system provides a comprehensive guide to rank the titles provided by participants as ‘non-Droodle’, ‘low-’, ‘medium-’, or
‘high-Droodle’ by the coder based on their initial reaction,
pattern matching, and categories and rationale. For instance,
in Figure 5 an example low-Droodle phrase would be ‘2 lines
sticking out of a circle’, and an example high-Droodle phrase
would be, ‘two birds hoisting a package’.
We evaluated 51 participants between the ages of 6 and 10
who played the Droodle Creativity Game with the robot. Participants were divided in two groups - the creative robot condition, and the non-creative robot condition. Participants’ and
robot’s creativity was measured by their fluency, the number
of ideas that the participants generated, novelty, the number
of unique themes explored through the ideas, and value, the
Droodle creativity metric as defined by Kahn et al. [Kahn
et al., 2016]. Participants for each condition were balanced
based on their pre-test creativity scores and age [Torrance,
1968].
We observed that participants that interacted with the creative robot generated significantly higher number of Droodle titles and expressed greater variety in titles, thus scoring
higher on the Droodles’ creativity M = 3.325, SD = 1, 16
versus the non-creative condition M = 2.416, SD = 0.96,
p < 0.01. This demonstrates that our robot interaction was
effective in causing children to model the social robot’s creative behavior. Furthermore, our robot interaction patterns
for artificial creativity is a good model for robot behavior that
fosters creativity in children.

We evaluated this curriculum with 225 middle school students in grades 5 through 8 across three 45-minute sessions.
These students had no prior formal AI or programming education. Students filled out pre- and post-tests with each
lesson, and activity worksheets during the lesson. Students
showed a capacity to engage with the material at varying levels. When asked how AI could be bad, students shared sentiments like “I learned that some AI, like facial recognition, has
trouble identifying darker people and females,” showing that
they understood the finding in Buolamwini and Gebru’s work
as unfair. Many more students responded to this question with
concerns about the future of work “Yes, it can take jobs from
humans” or concerns about a robot apocalypse, “Also, there’s
terminator.” It is clear that future instruction on the societal
impact of AI will need to address narratives from the media.

6

Conclusions

In this paper, we discussed three projects that engage primary
and middle school students in AI education with an emphasis

on constructionism, ethics, and creativity. Within each curriculum there are important next steps to be taken. For PopBots and AI + Ethics, we are expanding the curricula to introduce more AI concepts and their societal implications. This
involves designing new interfaces and activities for children
to explore. In AI for creativity, we have developed and are
evaluating new games where children need to produce creative ideas to train their robot to complete tasks. In the bigger
picture, we are looking at how insights about our core principles and age ranges can transfer across the three projects.

References
[Ali et al., 2019] Safinah Ali, Tyler Moroso, and Cynthia
Breazeal. Leveraging social robots as a creativity support
tool for young children. In Conference on Creativity and
Cognition. ACM, 2019. ”In press”.
[Alves-Oliveira et al., 2017] Patrı́cia
Alves-Oliveira,
Patrı́cia Arriaga, Ana Paiva, and Guy Hoffman. Yolo,
a robot for creativity: A co-design study with children.
In Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on Interaction
Design and Children, pages 423–429. ACM, 2017.
[Belpaeme et al., 2018] Tony Belpaeme, James Kennedy,
Aditi Ramachandran, Brian Scassellati, and Fumihide
Tanaka. Social robots for education: A review. Science
Robotics, 3(21), 2018.
[Boden, 2004] Margaret A Boden. The creative mind: Myths
and mechanisms. Routledge, 2004.
[Buolamwini and Gebru, 2018] Joy Buolamwini and Timnit
Gebru. Gender shades: Intersectional accuracy disparities in commercial gender classification. In Conference on
Fairness, Accountability and Transparency, pages 77–91,
2018.
[Druga, 2018] Stefania Druga. Cognimates, 2018.
[Google, 2018] Creative Labs Google. Teachable machine.
http://teachablemachine.withgoogle.com, 2018.
[Gordon et al., 2015] Goren Gordon, Cynthia Breazeal, and
Susan Engel. Can children catch curiosity from a social
robot? In Proceedings of the Tenth Annual ACM/IEEE
International Conference on Human-Robot Interaction,
pages 91–98. ACM, 2015.
[Guilford, 1950] JP Guilford. Creativity. american psychology. 1950.
[Hanna Gunn, 2019] Cathy O’Neil Hanna Gunn. Near term
ai. Ethics of Artificial Intelligence, 2019. ”In press”.
[Kahn et al., 2016] Peter H. Kahn, Jr., Takayuki Kanda, Hiroshi Ishiguro, Brian T. Gill, Solace Shen, Jolina H. Ruckert, and Heather E. Gary. Human creativity can be facilitated through interacting with a social robot. In The
Eleventh ACM/IEEE International Conference on Human
Robot Interaction, HRI ’16, pages 173–180, Piscataway,
NJ, USA, 2016. IEEE Press.
[Kahn et al., 2018] Ken Kahn, Rani Megasari, Erna Piantari,
and Enjun Junaeti. AI programming by children using

snap! block programming in a developing country. In ECTEL Practitioner Proceedings 2018: 13th European Conference On Technology Enhanced Learning, Leeds, UK,
September 3-6, 2018., 2018.
[Kohlberg and Hersh, 1977] Lawrence
Kohlberg
and
Richard H Hersh. Moral development: A review of the
theory. Theory into practice, 16(2):53–59, 1977.
[Lane, 2018] D Lane. Machine learning for kids, 2018.
[O’Neil, 2016] Cathy O’Neil. Weapons of math destruction:
How big data increases inequality and threatens democracy. Broadway Books, 2016.
[Park et al., 2017] Hae Won Park, Rinat Rosenberg-Kima,
Maor Rosenberg, Goren Gordon, and Cynthia Breazeal.
Growing growth mindset with a social robot peer. In 2017
12th ACM/IEEE International Conference on HumanRobot Interaction (HRI), pages 137–145. IEEE, 2017.
[Severson et al., 2005] Rachel Severson, Erika Feldman,
Kahn , Peter H, and Batya Friedman. Creativity tasks
and coding system – used in the plasma display window
study. 2005.
[Skirpan et al., 2018] Michael Skirpan, Nathan Beard, Srinjita Bhaduri, Casey Fiesler, and Tom Yeh. Ethics education
in context: A case study of novel ethics activities for the
cs classroom. In Proceedings of the 49th ACM Technical
Symposium on Computer Science Education, pages 940–
945. ACM, 2018.
[Torrance, 1968] E Paul Torrance. A longitudinal examination of the fourth grade slump in creativity. Gifted Child
Quarterly, 12(4):195–199, 1968.
[Touretzky and Gardner-McCune, 2018] David S. Touretzky
and Christina Gardner-McCune. Calypso for cozmo:
Robotic AI for everyone (abstract only). In Proceedings of
the 49th ACM Technical Symposium on Computer Science
Education, SIGCSE 2018, Baltimore, MD, USA, February
21-24, 2018, page 1110, 2018.
[Touretzky et al., 2019] David
Touretzky,
Christina
Gardner-McCune, Fred Martin, and Deborah Seehorn. Envisioning ai for k-12: What should every child
know about ai? In AAAI, 2019.
[Williams et al., 2019a] Randi Williams, Hae Won Park, and
Cynthia Breazeal. A is for artificial intelligence: The impact of artificial intelligence activities on young children’s
perceptions of robots. In CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems Proceedings. ACM, 2019. ”In
press”.
[Williams et al., 2019b] Randi Williams, Hae Won Park,
Lauren Oh, and Cynthia Breazeal. Popbots: Designing an
artificial intelligence curriculum for early childhood education. In The 9th Symposium on Educational Advances in
Artificial Intelligence, 2019.
[Zimmerman, 2018] Michelle Zimmerman. Teaching AI:
Exploring New Frontiers for Learning. International Society for Technology in Education, 12 2018.

