Learn to Machine Learn: Designing a Game Based Approach for
Teaching Machine Learning to Primary and Secondary
Education Students
Iro Voulgari

Marvin Zammit

Elias Stouraitis

Institute of Digital Games
University of Malta
Msida, Malta
iro.voulgari@um.edu.mt

Institute of Digital Games
University of Malta
Msida, Malta
marvin.zammit@um.edu.mt

Palladio School
Athens, Greece
ilias.stouraitis@palladio.edu.gr

Antonios Liapis

Georgios N. Yannakakis

Institute of Digital Games
University of Malta
Msida, Malta
antonios.liapis@um.edu.mt

Institute of Digital Games
University of Malta
Msida, Malta
georgios.yannakakis@um.edu.mt

ABSTRACT
With the ubiquitous role of Artificial Intelligence (AI) in everyday applications such as smartphones and social media, children
need digital literacy skills to navigate the digital world, critically
view, and reflect on the social and ethical implications of the design
and architecture of AI systems. To address this increasing need
for AI literacy skills, particularly for younger students, this paper
presents the rationale of the LearnML project which aims to develop
a framework and game-based educational material for promoting
AI literacy among primary and secondary education students. We
also describe the design and initial assessment of the game “ArtBot”, developed as part of the LearnML project. We review existing
literature, discuss the educational game design and development of
“ArtBot” and describe the initial feedback of students and teachers.
Our goal is to provide insights and suggest guidelines for the implementation of game-based learning environments for supporting
AI literacy skills of students.

CCS CONCEPTS
• Applied computing → Computer-assisted instruction; • Social and professional topics → Computational thinking; K12 education; Computing literacy; Information technology
education; Computer science education; Children; Adolescents.

KEYWORDS
Game-based learning, AI literacy, AI education, machine learning,
digital literacy skills, primary education, secondary education, educational game design
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).
IDC ’21, June 24–30, 2021, Athens, Greece
© 2021 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-8452-0/21/06.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3459990.3465176

ACM Reference Format:
Iro Voulgari, Marvin Zammit, Elias Stouraitis, Antonios Liapis, and Georgios N. Yannakakis. 2021. Learn to Machine Learn: Designing a Game
Based Approach for Teaching Machine Learning to Primary and Secondary
Education Students. In Interaction Design and Children (IDC ’21), June
24–30, 2021, Athens, Greece. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 6 pages. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3459990.3465176

1

INTRODUCTION

Artificial Intelligence (AI) and Machine Learning (ML) are already
ubiquitous in everyday life in applications such as speech and image
recognition, smartphones, smart toys, recommendation systems,
personalised information on social media and search engines, and
autonomous vehicles. The term AI describes the general field of
algorithms and processes by which an application performs tasks
that seem to mimic human behaviour or intelligence. ML is a subset
of these algorithms through which a computing process progressively adapts and improves its performance in a specific task or set
of tasks [20]. Besides the value and benefits of AI, concerns have
been raised on the potential pitfalls and challenges regarding the
decisions such systems might make, the autonomy of the AI agents,
and the values and bias embedded in their design [11]. In this context, children and youth have to develop digital literacy skills to
navigate the digital space and cope with this major shift in the way
information is accessed, processed, and distributed. Students need
to be able to understand how computational systems work and their
value for societal issues [1] and also develop the skills to access,
critically analyse and interpret data and information, recognise
emerging cultural and social biases embedded in the design of computer systems, and the ethical and political implications [6, 7, 18].
Such skills and competences can empower students to adopt a more
critical and inquisitive approach towards existing technological
environments and to engage more actively in the design of new
technology systems [15].
In this context, an emphasis is placed over the past few years on
AI and ML literacy, addressing not only the technical aspects of AI
and ML but also on the ethical and cultural implications. AI literacy
addresses not only Computer Science graduate students, but also

IDC ’21, June 24–30, 2021, Athens, Greece

primary and secondary education students with varied degrees
of expertise in AI, ML, and computer programming. Despite the
inherent challenges of teaching such abstract and complex concepts
to children [16], a number of successful approaches have been proposed for early AI literacy. An example is the Artificial Intelligence
Curriculum [21, 22] designed to empower early childhood children
to understand how AI devices from their everyday experience work,
main AI concepts such as labelling and classification, and discuss issues such as the meaning of intelligence. Another AI curriculum for
middle school students [8] aimed at raising awareness on technical
concepts of AI and their ethical implications, such as algorithmic
bias. As another example, card-based design workshops for students aged 16-20 [2] were carried out to support exploration and
reflection on the moral decisions ML systems are designed to make.
Such workshops and approaches encourage insightful discussions
about ethics and ML technology, rather than focus on the technical
aspects and the design of a functional prototype [2].
Situated in this context, the “Learn to Machine Learn” (LearnML)
project aims to develop an AI education framework and toolbox for
supporting primary and secondary education students and teachers,
including a game-based learning toolbox and relevant teacher training, teaching and learning material. Aiming to promote a culture of
openness and participatory design, the project involved educators
and students from the early stages of the design of the learning
goals and the educational material, scenarios, and games, through
focus groups and workshops. Our main goal in this paper is to
examine and provide insights on the game design and development
considerations for effective implementation of games for AI education. We present and review the design and initial assessment by
students and teachers of the digital game “ArtBot”, developed as
part of the LearnML education toolbox.

Iro Voulgari, Marvin Zammit, Elias Stouraitis, Antonios Liapis, and Georgios N. Yannakakis

using Google Teachable Machine and the researchers’ own educational application for object recognition [17]. The results were
promising; although the students’ conceptions of ML seemed to
be closely linked to their own applications and the tools used, the
workshops were a good entry point for exploring ML concepts,
exhibit empathy about other people’s needs, and engage in inductive reasoning about the quality of their datasets and accuracy of
their models. Druga et al. [4] focused on children aged 7-12 and
concluded that they were able to engage in meaningful and creative
ways with AI agents, such as the Alexa home assistant and the
Cozmo robot.
AI and ML education tools tend to follow two directions: a) openended tools and platforms where students can design and create
their own models and b) digital games scaffolding students through
gameplay. These two directions may complement each other linking scaffolding with design-based pedagogy [5]. Existing studies
suggest that such tools, when used in an appropriate pedagogical context and learning activities, may help students understand
principles and processes of AI and ML and engage in meaningful
reflection and discussions. Another critical aspect that emerged is
the importance of engaging students through meaningful activities,
close to their experience and interests. When students are more
engaged, they explore the role and implications of AI inductively
and make inferences about its potential value and limitations.
In this context, we aimed to integrate elements of these two
directions in our game design, by guiding the players and also
providing opportunities for exploration and experimentation. A
meaningful story and narrative that would trigger the interest of
the students was also important for our design, so as to motivate
and engage them with the game.

3
2

GAMES AND APPLICATIONS FOR AI AND
ML EDUCATION

Digital games seems to be an appropriate tool for approaching the
complex concepts and processes involved in AI systems [3]. A good
number and a wide range of games, applications, and platforms
seem to be available for children as young as 4 years old, addressing
different aspects of AI and ML, such as technical concepts, and ethical and social implications [5]. In a study by Zimmermann-Niefield
et al. [23], middle and high school students developed ML models
based on data from their athletic activities, linking their existing
interests with their ML model. Students aged 12-13 developed their
own models using Google Teachable Machine (GTM) [14] demonstrating that GTM was a feasible tool for young students with little
or no experience in programming. Diverse audiences (high school
students, university students, law enforcement officers and park
rangers) were introduced to ML concepts through an online and a
board role playing game, situated in a real-world problem (the protection of wildlife). Participants reported positive attitudes toward
the games and increased interest in ML [13]. Similarly, Vartiainen
et al. implemented design-based workshops, grounded on Papert’s
constructionist approach where 12-13 year old students designed
their own ML applications. The workshops were grounded on realworld problems close to the students’ experience and interests,

A METHODOLOGY FOR DESIGNING A
GAME-BASED APPROACH TO TEACH
MACHINE LEARNING

In this section we discuss the design, development, and initial feedback on the “ArtBot” game from students and teachers, and draw
insights from this experience. Prior to the design of the game-based
educational material, discussions and focus groups with teachers
and students were conducted, where we examined their perceptions and potential misconceptions about AI, their ideas about how
AI could be introduced into formal education, and potential educational scenarios and activities. Some of the main points that
emerged from these focus groups were:
(1) Games selected and developed should be easy to install and
use even in low-end systems. Some of the teachers reported
very limited hardware and software resources in schools.
(2) AI behaviour and processes should be made as clear as possible to the students and teachers; they should be able to
understand how an AI system works.
(3) Ethical issues and concerns about the role and implications
of AI in everyday life and society should be addressed.
(4) The educational material (educational scenarios, resources,
games) should be close to the students’ experience.
(5) Educational material should allow for interdisciplinary teaching approaches, and be applicable to different fields such as
computing, history, arts, language, and literature.

Learn to Machine Learn: Designing a Game Based Approach for Teaching Machine Learning

(6) Games and activities would be easier to implement in the
classroom if they correspond to existing learning objectives
of the curriculum.
We tried to address these points, as will be further discussed in
the next section, by designing, for example, a game with low technical requirements, by defining appropriate learning goals regarding
the technical and ethical aspects of AI, and by implementing a
meaningful narrative that would allow for interdisciplinary teaching approaches.

3.1

ArtBot: Educational Game Design

“ArtBot” was designed by a team of educators, game developers,
and AI experts with the aim to support AI literacy of primary and
secondary education students. Our first step was to identify the
learning objectives and core ML principles to be introduced through
the game. The players should be able to:
(1) Understand the process of Supervised Learning: students
are introduced to the concepts of training datasets, testing
datasets, classification, labelling, image recognition, decision
trees, and prediction accuracy, and understand the role of
these elements in the architecture and behaviour of an AI
system.
(2) Understand the process of Reinforcement Learning: students
are introduced to the concepts or rewards and penalties,
learning duration, learning rate, exploration, exploitation,
and pathfinding.
(3) Understand the impact of the decisions made during the
design and programming of an AI system on the behaviour
and output of the system, as well as reflect on the concept
of algorithmic bias and understand how human values and
bias may define the behaviour of AI applications.
(4) Discuss about the impact of the behaviour of an AI system
on everyday life situations e.g. face recognition, autonomous
vehicles.
The game was developed in the Unity game engine to facilitate deployment to a range of platforms. The game has been initially launched on Windows (32 and 64-bit) operating system and
deployed on the Learn ML website (http://learnml.eu/games.php)
using WebGL (see Figures 1 and 2 for screenshots of the game).
We aimed to introduce the students to elements and processes of
supervised and reinforcement learning by combining a meaningful
narrative and simulation mechanics. Players have the quest to find
and retrieve valuable art objects that have been stolen and hidden.
Through the first part of the game, the process of supervised learning is introduced; players train their AI helper to recognise specific
art objects (paintings and sculptures). They classify a set of training
data, experiment with different parameters, and then see how well
the helper was trained by observing how it classifies a set of testing
data. More specifically, a set of 40 photographs of paintings and
sculptures available in the public domain were downloaded from
the online open collection of The Metropolitan Museum of Art [9].
This superset of images was chosen to contain equal amounts of
paintings and sculptures, and every time that this mini-game is
played, a subset of 20 images is chosen at random as the training set.
The players must label the images as either a painting or a sculpture (see Figure 1a). This design choice highlights both the essential

IDC ’21, June 24–30, 2021, Athens, Greece

part of AI, which is data labelling, and shows the importance of
classification at this stage, since the algorithm will then process
the images according to the assigned labels. The disadvantage to
this approach was that the size of the training set had to be kept as
small as possible to avoid making the labelling task tedious. A small
training set inevitably means an unreliable output of the learning
algorithm, resulting in a bias towards the features prominent in the
data set. However, this was determined to be less important than
illustrating the concept of data labelling, and the results obtained
were good enough for the scope of the game. The algorithm used
to classify the images consisted of a decomposition of the palette
of the images in the training set to a number of primary colours.
The players are given a choice as to how many primary colours
they want the algorithm to use, and the hue spectrum is subdivided
accordingly. From this grouping a percentage of image pixels in
each group is obtained and used to train a decision tree using a C4.5
algorithm [12]. The player may also determine the maximum depth
of the decision tree, which was capped at 3 for the purpose of readability in the game (see Figure 1b). After the training is complete,
the labels are inferred both for the training image set, as well as for
the remaining images in the data superset. For the latter, the label
is compared to the ground truth since no user labelling is available.
An accuracy score is calculated for both the training and the testing
set and shown to the player.
During the second part of the game, the players and their AI
helper need to navigate through a series of dungeons and collect
the stolen art objects. The players are introduced to the processes
of reinforcement learning; they guide their helper by indicating
what type of objects to look for and which ones to avoid (e.g. traps),
by assigning rewards to the right objects. The AI helper tries to
find its path based on the parameters set by the players, such as the
exploration and exploitation rates. The players watch the process,
they can pause or accelerate it (see Figure 1b), and think what
settings would help the AI to find as many objects as possible. This
part was implemented using a standard Q-learning algorithm [19].
The agent has to navigate a level that contains an exit, hazards
(spikes), collectables (statues) and non-navigable spaces (holes),
by performing a move in one of the four cardinal directions. The
movements of the agent are discrete, as is the space of the level. For
faster evaluation of the learning algorithm, the size of each level
was limited to an 8 × 8 grid. This part allows the players to modify
two sets of parameters: (1) The rewards or penalties assigned to
hazards, rewards and the exit spaces, and (2) the parameters of the
learning algorithm. The rewards or penalties are set by players
using simple sliders ranging from a penalty (shown with a red
icon) to a reward (shown with a green icon) for the hazards and
the collectables. For the exit, the reward slider only allowed for a
small or a large positive reward, not a negative one. This prevents
the agent from roaming aimlessly the level if a negative reward is
assigned to the exit, since in that case the game would only end with
the destruction of the agent on a hazard space. These settings allow
the players to observe how the type and magnitude of rewards
(positive or negative) affect the behaviour learned by the agent.
The second part of the settings control the main parameters of the
algorithm (see Figure 2a), namely: (1) The total time for which the
algorithm is allowed to run (learning duration), (2) bias of algorithm
to exploration of unvisited locations (i.e. taking random actions),

IDC ’21, June 24–30, 2021, Athens, Greece

Iro Voulgari, Marvin Zammit, Elias Stouraitis, Antonios Liapis, and Georgios N. Yannakakis

(a) Player setting up the supervised learning task

(a) Player setting up the reinforcement learning task

(b) AI agent simulating the supervised learning task

(b) AI agent simulating the reinforcement learning task

Figure 1: Screenshots of the first part of the “ArtBot” game:
(a) The player labels the artefacts, (b) The agent classifies the
training and the testing data sets.

Figure 2: Screenshots of the second part of the “ArtBot”
game: (a) The player defines the variables of the agent’s reinforcement learning, (b) A final report is generated on the
outcomes of the agent’s pathfinding.

versus using the rewards learned up to that point to determine
the next best move (exploitation), (3) the discount factor, which
controls the weight given to knowledge obtained in previous cycles
in comparison to a new reward when it is being calculated (use
experience), (4) the learning rate, which controls how much an
obtained reward will influence the movement policy (learning rate).
The game guides the player through these sets of actions, but
also provides opportunities for exploration, experimentation, and
reflection. Students are introduced to the learning content through
a more open, constructivist approach. They are encouraged to explore, experiment, and construct their knowledge by observing
the outcomes of their actions, evaluate the results, make and test
their hypotheses. Through the design of the game we tried to avoid
common stereotypes and address students’ misconceptions of AI,
such as the anthropomorphic nature of AI systems. We selected an
unidentified object to represent the AI helper, so as to challenge
the idea that AI only applies to robots, but that it may be applied
to a variety of technology and computer systems. Players do have
the option to choose and modify the appearance of their AI helper,
including different models and colour variants; however, all models
are fairly abstract and non-anthropomorphic. By setting the game in
the context of cultural heritage (art objects) our aim was to address

the multidisciplinary application of AI systems, beyond computing
and programming, such as archaeology, art, and transportation.

3.2

Game Assessment

Initial feedback on the game was collected through two online
surveys for teachers and students. The students’ survey included
19 closed and open-ended questions, while the teachers’ survey
included 20 closed and open-ended questions (2 of them on demographic characteristics). The survey was completed by 130 students
from Greece, aged 12-17 years, and 17 teachers of different disciplines (physics, mathematics, computing, literature, language, and
primary education teachers). 68 (52%) of the students identified as
male, 58 (44%) identified as female, and 5 preferred not to say. 5
(29%) of the teachers identified as male while 12 (71%) identified as
female.
The positive comments of the students mainly referred to the
learning aspect of the game; the students enjoyed learning while
playing and teaching the AI agent based on criteria they could
choose, the settings they had to think about. They enjoyed that they
had to think of the appropriate strategies and “use their brain”. They
also reported enjoying the graphics, and the fact that they could play

Learn to Machine Learn: Designing a Game Based Approach for Teaching Machine Learning

with their friends. One of the students reported that “It’s different
from the usual games”. Although most of the students reported that
they wouldn’t change anything in the game, in some responses the
students referred to the game as either too monotonous, boring,
easy, and slow, or too complicated and time consuming at times.
The positive aspects of the game as reported by the teachers were
the ease-of-use, the graphics, the interesting topic, the additional
information included, and also the possibility of the players to select
the appearance of their AI helper. Based on the teachers’ comments
on the negative aspects, however, it seems that additional material
would be necessary for explaining the different variables (e.g. the
discount factor which was labelled as “use experience”) and how
the settings and variables affect the behaviour of the AI helper. For
some of the teachers it seemed difficult to understand what were
the optimal settings for succeeding in the quests. The challenge of
introducing advanced concepts of AI to novice students, as well
as the critical role of supporting material and the guidance of a
teacher were discussed by Parker et al. [10] in their review of the
game “ViPER” which also aimed to teach AI and ML concepts to
young students.
The closed-ended questions of the survey assessed the ease of
use of the game, perceived enjoyment, whether respondents would
like to use the game in the classroom, and their previous game
experience. We report positive responses as those with agreement
or strong agreement in the 5-item Likert scale. Indicatively, 88% of
students and 77% of teachers responded that it was easy for them
to understand how to play the game, 59% of students and 88% of
teachers responded that they would recommend the game to friends
and colleagues respectively, 73% of students and 82% of teachers
responded that the game helped them understand what machine
learning is. 82% of teachers responded that the game would help
students understand the concept of AI.

4

CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK

The “ArtBot” game seemed to be well received by students and
teachers; it seemed to be enjoyable and facilitated understanding of
main ML concepts. Involving teachers and students from the early
stages of design was valuable as it allowed us to consider their interests, previous experience with AI, potential technical limitations,
and concerns about the role of AI. Further study is certainly needed
for examining in depth the interaction of the students and teachers
with the game in classroom settings, potential misconceptions that
may emerge, learning outcomes, opportunities for critical thinking
and reflection, and possible difficulties. One of the main points for
future actions that emerged from the first assessment with students
and teachers is the need to develop supporting material for elaborating on the main concepts presented, and also educational scenarios
and activities for formal and non-formal education. Specifically, it
would be important to provide topics for further discussion on the
implications of the quality of the datasets and the training of the
algorithms, resources for further reading, examples of real world
implementations and implications.
Our goal in the LearnML project and through the “ArtBot” game
was to develop supporting AI and ML education material and to
trigger the critical thinking of students on the aspects, factors and
bias that may shape AI agents and systems. We aim to provide

IDC ’21, June 24–30, 2021, Athens, Greece

teachers, students, and the public with not only awareness and
knowledge of AI and ML implications, but also practical tools and
ways to envision and bring about positive change, using AI and ML
as drivers for systemic change. Building upon the experiences and
insights of existing applications, practices and tools for AI and ML
education, it is important that curricula in primary and secondary
education are re-designed so that the students can develop the
literacies needed for critically engaging with AI applications and
becoming more informed and conscious citizens [20]. Issues of
inclusion and democratisation of access to AI literacy need to also
be addressed, considering the differences in the attitudes towards AI,
and experience with programming and AI technologies in children
of different social, economical and cultural backgrounds [4].

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work is supported by the “Learn to Machine Learn” (LearnML)
project, under the Erasmus+ Strategic Partnership program (Project
Number: 2019-1-MT01-KA201-051220).

REFERENCES
[1] Tilde Bekker, Saskia Bakker, Iris Douma, Janneke van der Poel, and Koen Scheltenaar. 2015. Teaching children digital literacy through design-based learning with
digital toolkits in schools. International Journal of Child-Computer Interaction 5
(2015), 29–38. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijcci.2015.12.001
[2] Karl-Emil Kjær Bilstrup, Magnus H. Kaspersen, and Marianne Graves Petersen.
2020. Staging Reflections on Ethical Dilemmas in Machine Learning: A CardBased Design Workshop for High School Students. In Proceedings of the Designing Interactive Systems Conference. 1211–1222. https://doi.org/10.1145/3357236.
3395558
[3] Douglas Clark, Brian Nelson, Pratim Sengupta, and Cynthia D’Angelo. 2009.
Rethinking Science Learning Through Digital Games and Simulations: Genres,
Examples, and Evidence. In Learning science: Computer games, simulations, and
education workshop.
[4] Stefania Druga, Sarah T. Vu, Eesh Likhith, and Tammy Qiu. 2019. Inclusive
AI Literacy for Kids around the World. In Proceedings of FabLearn. 104–111.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3311890.3311904
[5] Michail Giannakos, Iro Voulgari, Sofia Papavlasopoulou, Zacharoula Papamitsiou,
and Georgios Yannakakis. 2020. Games for Artificial Intelligence and Machine
Learning Education: Review and Perspectives. 117–133. https://doi.org/10.1007/978981-15-6747-6_7
[6] Ting-Chia Hsu, Shao-Chen Chang, and Yu-Ting Hung. 2018. How to learn and
how to teach computational thinking: Suggestions based on a review of the
literature. Computers & Education 126 (2018), 296–310. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
compedu.2018.07.004
[7] Tibor Koltay. 2011. The media and the literacies: media literacy, information
literacy, digital literacy. Media, Culture & Society 33, 2 (2011), 211–221. https:
//doi.org/10.1177/0163443710393382
[8] MIT Media Lab. 2021. AI + Ethics Curriculum for Middle School Project. MIT Media
Lab, Personal Robots group. https://www.media.mit.edu/projects/ai-ethics-formiddle-school/overview/ Retrieved April 13, 2021.
[9] MET Museum of Art. 2020. The MET Open Collection. The Metropolitan Museum
of Art, New York. https://www.metmuseum.org Retrieved November 12, 2020.
[10] James Parker and Katrin Becker. 2014. ViPER : Game That Teaches Machine
Learning Concepts - A Postmortem. In Proceedings of the IEEE Games and Entertainment Media Conference.
[11] Stuart Russell, Daniel Dewey, and Max Tegmark. 2015. Research Priorities for
Robust and Beneficial Artificial Intelligence. AI Magazine 36, 4 (2015), 105–114.
https://doi.org/10.1609/aimag.v36i4.2577
[12] Steven L. Salzberg. 1994. C4.5: Programs for Machine Learning by J. Ross Quinlan.
Machine Learning 16, 3 (1994), 235–240. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00993309
[13] Nicole Sintov, Debarun Kar, Thanh Nguyen, Fei Fang, Kevin Hoffman, Arnaud
Lyet, and Milind Tambe. 2016. From the Lab to the Classroom and beyond:
Extending a Game-Based Research Platform for Teaching AI to Diverse Audiences.
In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence. 4107–4112.
[14] Tapani Toivonen, Ilkka Jormanainen, Juho Kahila, Matti Tedre, Teemu Valtonen,
and Henriikka Vartiainen. 2020. Co-Designing Machine Learning Apps in K–12
With Primary School Children. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference
on Advanced Learning Technologies (ICALT). 308–310. https://doi.org/10.1109/
ICALT49669.2020.00099

IDC ’21, June 24–30, 2021, Athens, Greece

[15] Tommaso Turchi, Daniela Fogli, and Alessio Malizia. 2019. Fostering computational thinking through collaborative game-based learning. Multimedia Tools
and Applications 78, 10 (2019), 13649–13673. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11042-0197229-9
[16] Henriikka Vartiainen, Matti Tedre, and Teemu Valtonen. 2020. Learning machine
learning with very young children: Who is teaching whom? International Journal
of Child-Computer Interaction 25 (2020). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijcci.2020.100182
[17] Henriikka Vartiainen, Tapani Toivonen, Ilkka Jormanainen, Juho Kahila, Matti
Tedre, and Teemu Valtonen. 2021. Machine learning for middle schoolers: Learning through data-driven design. International Journal of Child-Computer Interaction 29 (2021). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijcci.2021.100281
[18] Steve Vosloo. 2018. Guidelines for digital inclusion. United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, Paris. https://en.unesco.org/themes/
literacy-all/pearson-initiative/guidelines Retrieved 7 May 2021.
[19] Christopher J. C. H. Watkins and Peter Dayan. 1992. Q-learning. Machine
Learning 8, 3 (1992), 279–292. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00992698

Iro Voulgari, Marvin Zammit, Elias Stouraitis, Antonios Liapis, and Georgios N. Yannakakis

[20] Mary E. Webb, Andrew Fluck, Johannes Magenheim, Joyce Malyn-Smith, Juliet
Waters, Michelle Deschênes, and Jason Zagami. 2020. Machine learning for human
learners: opportunities, issues, tensions and threats. Educational Technology
Research and Development (2020). https://doi.org/10.1007/s11423-020-09858-2
[21] Randi Williams, Hae Won Park, and Cynthia Breazeal. 2019. A is for Artificial
Intelligence: The Impact of Artificial Intelligence Activities on Young Children’s
Perceptions of Robots. In Proceedings of the CHI Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems. https://doi.org/10.1145/3290605.3300677
[22] Randi Williams, Hae Won Park, Lauren Oh, and Cynthia Breazeal. 2019. PopBots:
Designing an Artificial Intelligence Curriculum for Early Childhood Education.
In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence. 9729–9736. https:
//doi.org/10.1609/aaai.v33i01.33019729
[23] Abigail Zimmermann-Niefield, Makenna Turner, Bridget Murphy, Shaun K. Kane,
and R. Benjamin Shapiro. 2019. Youth Learning Machine Learning through
Building Models of Athletic Moves. In Proceedings of the ACM International
Conference on Interaction Design and Children. 121–132. https://doi.org/10.1145/
3311927.3323139

