Digital Learning Games in Artificial
Intelligence in Education (AIED): A Review
Bruce M. McLaren and Huy Nguyen
Human-Computer Interaction Institute, Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh PA 15213
Keywords: Digital learning games, artificial intelligence, learning technology, natural language
processing

1. Introduction
Digital and computer games have captured the attention and imagination of people around the world.
Lobel and colleagues (2017) report that Dutch children (7 to 12 years old) play digital games between 4.9
and 5.8 hours per week, while a slightly older age range of children in New York City (10 to 15 years old)
has been reported as playing even more: between 30 and 42 hours a week (Homer et al., 2012). Digital
game play has also been significantly on the rise: According to a 2019 survey by the NPD Group (NPD,
2019), 73 percent of Americans aged 2 and older play digital games, a 6% increase from the prior year.
There are reports of more than 2.6 billion people world-wide being video game players, with an expected
rise to over 3 billion people by 2023 (Gilbert, 2021).
This general interest in digital games has also transferred to schools and educational use of computerbased games. Digital learning games, also called educational games, began to be designed, developed
and sporadically appear in classrooms by the late 1990s (Zeng et al., 2020). A flourishing in digital
learning games has occurred since 2000, boosted by concurrent advancements in supporting technology,
such as computer graphics and faster processors. President Obama helped to push this interest forward
by launching the National STEM Game Design Competition in 2010. Today, according to Juraschka
(2019), 74% of teachers use digital game-based learning to enhance their lessons and the majority of
teachers who use games in the classroom believe games have been helpful in improving their students’
learning.
In addition to the increasing interest in and playing of digital learning games, there is also increasing
empirical evidence of the effectiveness of games in helping people learn. Academics became interested
in the motivational potential of digital learning games some time ago (Castell & Jenson, 2003; Gros,
2007), and an increase in empirical research has followed over the past 15 years or so. Meta-analyses
over the past five years have uncovered and discussed the educational benefits of digital learning games
(Clark et al., 2016; Crocco et al., 2016; Ke, 2016; Mayer, 2019; Tokac et al., 2019; Wouters & van
Oostendorp, 2017). Even video games without a specific aim to provide educational benefits have been
shown to increase students' skills, for instance, perceptual attention (Bediou et al., 2018). The Clark et al.
(2016) meta-analysis identified that careful attention to game design – the way in which a game’s
interface and mechanics supports interaction with the student player – can result in positive learning
results. Furthermore, there is strong evidence that designing digital games based on cognitive theories of
learning and empirical learning science results can lead to educational benefits. For instance, Parong and
colleagues have shown that executive function skills can be trained through a digital learning game
designed expressly for that purpose (Parong et al., 2017; 2020). McLaren and colleagues found that
designing a game explicitly targeted at mathematics misconceptions and employing self-explanation
prompts – a technique that has been shown to lead to learning benefits in a variety of contexts (Chi et al.,

1

1994; 1989; Mayer & Johnson, 2010; Wylie & Chi, 2014) – can lead to learning benefits (McLaren et al.,
2017).
While it is clear that game design and attention to what we know about how humans learn has been
beneficial to the design and success of digital learning games, what about the use of artificial intelligence
(AI) in the design and development of digital learning games? It seems natural to insert AI into digital
learning games to make them more realistic, more challenging, and more adaptive to students' skill level
and style of play. Yet, a recent meta-analysis of digital learning games notes that over the past 20 years
AI has rarely been cited as a component of learning games (Schöbel et al., 2021). Thus, a natural
question that arises is: Has the field of Artificial Intelligence in Education (AIED) actually made an impact
on learning with digital games? In this chapter we explore this question by discussing the way that AI has
been used in digital learning games until now, as well as how it might provide even more benefit to
learning with digital learning games in the future.

2. Foundations of Learning From Games
Between the mid 1970s and 1990 Czikszentmihalyi developed and described the theory of flow, a
state of optimal experience, where a person is so engaged in the activity at hand that self-consciousness
disappears, a sense of time is lost, and the person engages in complex, goal-directed activity (often with
immediate feedback) not for external rewards, but simply for the exhilaration of doing (Czikszentmihalyi,
1990; 1975). For over 20 years Czikszentmihalyi had been studying “states of optimal experience” –
times when people, while undertaking an engaging activity, report feelings of concentration and deep
enjoyment. Flow induces focused concentration and total absorption in an activity. Everyone experiences
flow from time to time and will recognize its characteristics: one feels strong, alert, in effortless control,
loses all self-consciousness, and is at the peak of their abilities. Often, the sense of time seems to
disappear, and a person in flow experiences a feeling of transcendence.
Digital games often immerse children – and people more generally – in flow and have long been
posited to help in the learning process (Gee, 2003). Some very early researchers in the area of cognitive
science identified constructs that are often part of games and appear to promote flow. For instance,
Malone (1981) identified fantasy, curiosity, and challenge as key to intrinsic motivation and learning with
games. Fantasy can serve to connect the player with content that they might otherwise reject as
conflicting with their identity (Kaufman & Flanagan, 2015). Curiosity can be promoted when learners have
the sense that their knowledge needs to be revised, for example, if it is incomplete or inconsistent.
Challenge depends upon activities that involve uncertain outcomes, hidden information or randomness.
While this theoretical work pre-dated most of present-day digital learning game research, all of the
constructs explored by Malone are clearly relevant and important to learning with games.
While flow and intrinsic motivation appear to be key to learning with digital games, states of human
affect, such as determination, confusion, frustration, and boredom, also play an important role (Loderer et
al., 2019). For example, even though frustration is a “negative” emotion, it could indicate that a student is
highly engaged while playing a challenging learning game (Gee, 2003). Determination and curiosity have
also been found to be strongly present during game play with learning games (Spann et al., 2019). A line
of AIED research that has investigated affect in gameplay has thus emerged, most typically involving data
mining of log files of student use of learning games (Baker et al., 2007; 2010; Shute et al., 2015) or using
sensors, video, and/or eye trackers to detect affect (Bosch et al., 2016; Conati & Gutica, 2016; Shute et
al., 2013).
Given this foundational theoretical (and some empirical) work, a number of researchers and
proselytizers have strongly pushed digital learning games as a panacea to the many shortcomings of
education in today’s world. In the early days, many claims were made about the benefits of learning with
digital learning games versus more traditional approaches (Gee, 2007; Prensky, 2006; Squire & Jenkins,

2

2003). Not long after the claims were made, however, others emphasized the lack of evidence for positive
learning outcomes with digital learning games (Honey & Hilton, 2011; Mayer, 2014; Tobias & Fletcher,
2011). Yet, as pointed out above, in recent years evidence has started to accumulate that digital learning
games can be beneficial to learning (Clark et al., 2016; Mayer, 2019), including substantial evidence from
within the AIED community (Arroyo et al., 2013; Easterday et al., 2017; Lee et al., 2011; McLaren et al.,
2017; Sawyer et al., 2017; Shute et al., 2015). How the AIED community has explored the space of
learning from digital games is discussed in the next section.

3. Digital Learning Games Research in AIED
For the purposes of this review chapter it is important to define, first, what a digital learning game is
and, second, when a digital learning game is an “AIED” learning game. Given that many digital learning
games are arguably not “AIED,” two separate definitions are necessary.
Note that many before us have made attempts to define what a “game” is (Rollings & Morris, 2000;
Salen & Zimmerman, 2003) and, in turn, what a “digital learning game” is (Mayer, 2014; Prensky, 2004).
While it is impossible to precisely define these terms, and any definition is subject to dispute, the following
components have typically been part of prior definitions of a digital learning game: (1) an interactive
program running on a computer or other electronic device; (2) “game play” in the form of an artificial
environment in which fun, challenge, and/or fantasy are involved; (3) instructional content or an
instructional objective is an integral part of the game play; (4) entertainment goals are part of the game
play (e.g., competition, having fun); and, finally, (5) a set of pre-defined rules guide game play. Given this
background, our working definition of a digital learning game is:
A digital learning game is an interactive, computer-based system in which users (i.e., players)
engage in artificial activities involving fun, challenge, and/or fantasy, instructional and entertainment
goals are part of the system, and pre-defined rules guide game play.
In turn, our definition of an AIED digital learning game is:
An AIED digital learning game is a digital learning game that (1) employs AI within its
operation and interaction with players and/or (2) has been developed and/or extended using
AI techniques (e.g., educational data mining, learning analytics, or machine learning).
Note that this definition implies that we include games that may not have been published within the
annual AIED conference proceedings or the International Journal of AI in Education. That is, we focus
more on how games operate, the extent to which AI is part of their game mechanism or post-use
analyses, rather than whether they have been published within the AIED community. That said, we also
focus on games that have been subject of some study of their efficacy and for which articles have been
published. Note further that we include in our review AI learning technology that is “gamified,” i.e.,
technology that was not (necessarily) developed originally as a game, but that includes gaming elements
such as badges, points, leaderboards, and interactive playful agents (Landers & Landers, 2014; Landers
et al., 2017). These elements may alter the game’s mechanics, the player’s interactions, or aspects of
player immersion and emotion, to improve the learner’s engagement and experience (Deterding et al.,
2011). Such technology falls, we believe, within the above definition of an AIED digital learning game.
Key examples of gamified AIED learning technology are MathSpring (Arroyo et al., 2013; 2014), iStart-2
(Jackson & McNamara, 2011; Jacovina et al., 2016), Gamified Lynnette (Long & Aleven, 2014; 2018),
and Gamified SQL-Tutor (Tahir et al., 2020).

3

In what follows, we explicitly call out the AI aspect of the games we cite and discuss. In the interest of
inclusiveness, recency and broad coverage, we are also somewhat liberal in including games that are
nascent, without much (or any) empirical evidence of their instructional effectiveness, especially more
recently developed and tested games that may be of interest to the AIED audience (e.g., Navigo - Benton
et al., 2021; TurtleTalk - Jung et al., 2019). On the other hand, we are clear about the games that have
been the subject of extensive empirical study (e.g., MathSpring - Arroyo et al., 2013; 2014; Crystal Island
- Lester et al., 2013; Decimal Point - McLaren et al., 2017; Physics Playground - Shute et al., 2015;
2021).
There are many ways that AIED-based digital learning games can be categorized, for instance, by
whether they are pure games or “gamified”, by their instructional topic, by the AI techniques used, by the
degree of learning impact they’ve had, etc. To provide a structure to the review of this chapter, we
present AIED games according to the four major ways in which AI has been used in the context of the
learning games:
1. AI-based Adaptation: Digital learning games that employ AI to perform adaptation in real-time
during play. That is, games that provide customized support (e.g., hints and error messages,
problems appropriate to a student’s current level of understanding, difficulty adjustment) to help
students solve problems and learn (Martin et al., 2021).
2. AI-based Decision Support: Digital learning games that feature AI-powered interactive
dashboards or recommendations; that is, these are games that don’t make decisions for students,
such as presenting the next problem or step to take, but instead present options, based on
students’ on-going performance.
3. AI Character Interaction: Games that employ an AI-driven non-player character (or characters)
(NPC) to support the learning process with the games. These types of games rely on a
“companion” to support students as they learn.
4. Use of Learning Analytics (LA) and/or Educational Data Mining (EDM) for Game Analysis and
Improvement: These are AIED games that don’t explicitly use AI for game play or game
mechanics, but instead employ AI to do post-game analysis. This analysis is typically done for
one of two reasons: to better understand how students interact with the game or to iteratively
improve the game.
We also present the games according to their general instructional domain (i.e., math, computer
science, natural science, humanities). Table 1 summarizes the prominent AIED digital learning games
that are reviewed in this chapter. We identified these games by using three prominent databases: Google
Scholar, Springer and Elsevier. In each database, we entered the search query as a combination of three
terms: (1) the learning domain, corresponding to a row in Table 1 (e.g., “math,” “computer science”), the
type of AI, corresponding to a column in Table 1 (e.g., “adaptation,” “interaction”), and (3) the keyword
“game.” While Table 1 provides a substantial number of digital learning games (more than 30), it is likely
missing some games that could have been included, i.e., it is meant to be a close-to (but perhaps not
quite) comprehensive literature review1. In addition, as we focus our search dimensions on the learning
domain and type of AI, we note that the reviewed games vary broadly in other characteristics, such as
maturity, sample size and research findings.
Table 1: Summary of AIED digital learning games
AI-based
Adaptation

1

AI-based
Decision Support

AI Character
Interaction

Use of Learning
Analytics (LA) and/or
Educational Data
Mining (EDM) for

The authors apologize for any AIED digital learning games that may have been overlooked in this review.

4

Game Analysis and
Improvement
Math

Maths Garden
(Klinkenberg et al.,
2011)
MathSpring *
(Arroyo et al., 2014;
2013)
Prime Climb *
(Conati et al., 2013)

Decimal Point *
(Harpstead et al.,
2019; Hou et al.,
2020; 2021;
McLaren et al, 2017)
Gamified Lynnette
(Long & Aleven,
2014; 2018)

MathSpring *
(Arroyo et al.,
2013; Arroyo et
al., 2014)
Squares Family
(Pareto, 2009;
2014; Sjödén et al.
2017)

Battleship Numberline
(Lomas et al., 2013;
2012; 2011)
Decimal Point *
(Nguyen et al., 2019;
2020)
Heroes of Math Island
(Conati & Gutica, 2016)
Prime Climb *
(Conati & Zhou, 2002)
Refraction
(O’Rourke et al., 2016;
2015; O’Rourke,
Ballweber et al., 2014;
O’Rourke, Haimovitz et
al., 2014)
Reasoning Mind
(Ocumpaugh et al.,
2013)
ST Math (PeddycordLiu et al., 2017)
Zombie Division
(Baker et al., 2007;
Habgood & Ainsworth,
2011)

Computer
Science

Natural
Science

AutoThinking *
(Hooshyar et al.,
2021)

TALENT *
(Maragos, 2013)

AutoThinking *
(Hooshyar et al.,
2021) *

Gamified SQL-Tutor
(Tahir et al., 2020)

ELIA (Kaczmarek
& Petroviča, 2018)

Minerva
(Lindberg et al., 2017;
2018)

TALENT *
(Maragos, 2013);

ELEKTRA
(Peirce et al., 2008)

Zoombinis
(Rowe et al, 2020;
2021)

TurtleTalk
(Jung et al., 2019)

Physics Playground
*

Betty’s Brain *
(Biswas et al.,

Beanstalk
(Aleven et al., 2013;

5

Physics Playground *
(Shute et al., 2021)

(Shute et al., 2019;
Shute, 2011)

2016)
Crystal Island *
(Lester et al.,
2013)

Harpstead & Aleven,
2015)
Betty’s Brain *
(Kinnebrew et al., 2017;
Munshi et al., 2018;
Segedy et al., 2015)
Crystal Island *
(Sabourin et al., 2013;
Sawyer et al., 2017)
Physics Playground *
(Shute et al., 2015)

Humanities

iStart-2
(Jackson &
McNamara, 2011;
Jacovina et al., 2016)
Navigo
(Benton et al., 2021)
Policy World
(Easterday et al.,
2017)

Keep Attention
(Hocine, 2019;
Hocine et al., 2019)

ECHOES
(Bernardini et al.
2014)

Tactical Language
and Culture Training
System *
(Johnson, 2010)

Tactical Language
and Culture
Training System *
(Johnson, 2010)

Downtown: A Subway
Adventure
(Cano et al., 2018;
2016)
TC3Sim (Henderson et
al., 2020a; 2020b)

* - A digital learning game that is in more than one of the AI categories

3.1. AI-based Adaptation
Perhaps the most common way that AI is and has been used in AIED digital learning games is by
adapting games to individual students and their learning progress. Usually, this means adapting the
difficulty of a game, problems within the game, or hints to optimize the game’s learning potential (Martin
et al., 2021). This approach is derivative of what has long been done with intelligent tutoring systems
(VanLehn, 2006; 2011), using approaches such as Bayesian Knowledge Tracing (Corbett & Anderson,
1995) and item response theory (Elo, 1978; Embretson & Reise, 2000).
Perhaps it is unsurprising that adapting instruction for individual students is a key research area of
AIED digital learning games, given how much attention this type of computer-based instruction has been
given in AIED research since its earliest days (Self, 2016) and until recently (see the chapter by Aleven,
Mavrikis et al. in this volume). As John Self, one of the founders of the AIED research community,
reported in his summary of the history of the field:
“AIED systems were, almost by definition, the only ones that carried out a significant, realtime analysis of the interaction with learners, in order to adapt that interaction. Other
systems claimed to be adaptive, but they were really only reacting in pre-specified ways to
different inputs. AIED systems responded in ways that had not been prespecified or even
envisaged. And that, of course, is the essential difference between AI programs and general
computer programs.” (Self, 2016, p. 9)
In fact, what Self says is essentially the difference between many of the games described in this

6

chapter and, for instance, the games that have come from non-AIED research (e.g., Mayer, 2019). On the
other hand, it is important that the emphasis is not only on the AI in games, but, like the many games that
Mayer (2019) discusses, that AIED digital learning games are proven in well-designed, randomized
controlled experiments.
In what follows, we first describe in detail two representative “AI-based adaptation” games from Table
1 – one in mathematics (MathSpring) and one in humanities (Policy World). We also discuss how AI has
specifically been used for adaptation in those games, as well as the empirical results that studies with
these games have uncovered. Finally, we present and discuss in a more succinct fashion other “AI-based
adaptation” games and summarize what we have learned about AI-based adaption games.
MathSpring (Arroyo et al., 2013; 2014) is a single player, online game for 4th through 7th grade
students to practice math problem solving (Figure 1(a)). The game, which was developed as a gamified
extension to the tutoring system Wayang Outpost, adapts problem difficulty to student performance and
offers hints, feedback, worked-out examples, and tutorial videos. The game also provides socio-emotional
support from “learning companion” characters (hence this game is also found in the “AI Character
Interaction” category). The game supports strategic and problem-solving abilities based on the theory of
cognitive apprenticeship (Collins et al., 1989). The software models solutions via worked-out examples
with the use of sound and animation and provides practice opportunities on math word problems.
MathSpring uses an AI-based adaptation algorithm to maintain students within their zone of proximal
development (Vygotsky, 1978); in particular, the algorithm adapts problem difficulty. The MathSpring
approach, referred to as “effort-based tutoring” (EBT), adapts problem selection depending on the effort
exerted by a student on a practice activity based on three dimensions of student behavior: attempts to
solve a problem, help requested, and time to answer. In addition, student affect is automatically predicted
while students play the game. Initially, this was achieved through information from physiological sensors
and student behavior within the game. Later, machine-learned detectors were created to predict student
emotions. The game also uses AI to drive a learning companion, an animated digital character that
speaks to the student (Figure 1(b)), deemphasizing the importance of immediate success and instead
encouraging effort.
MathSpring has been used in middle and high schools in the U.S. as part of regular math classes
since 2004, in some instances just before students take the Massachusetts statewide-standardized test
exams. In a variety of studies involving hundreds of students, the game has led to improved performance
in mathematics and on the state standardized tests. It has also led to improved engagement and affective
outcomes for groups of students as a whole, as well as for certain subgroups, e.g., female students and
low achieving students.

(a)

(b)

7

Figure 1(a) and 1(b): In MathSpring students use math to grow plants representing progress and effort in the game
(1(a)). Plants might bloom and give peppers, or wither if students show disengagement. Figure 1(b) shows an
example of an AI-driven learning companion in MathSpring, used to encourage student’s effort. (Figures provided by
Ivon Arroyo, reproduced by permission)

Policy World (Easterday et al., 2017) is a digital learning game targeted at university students in which
the player assumes the role of a policy analyst (Figure 2(a)) who must defend the public against an
unscrupulous corporate lobbyist (Figure 2(b)) by persuading a Senator (Figure 2(c)) to adopt evidencebased policies that protect the public interest. The game has two modes of operation: game only and
game+tutor, the second of which includes a back-end intelligent tutoring system that provides step-level
feedback and immediate error correction. The narrative of Policy World emphasizes empowerment: a
young policy analyst (i.e., the student playing the game) is recognized as having potential by the head of
a policy think-tank. The student is guided by two mentor characters: another young but more senior
analyst; and a sharp-tongued virtual tutor that teaches the student to analyze policies (Figure 2(d)). At the
end of the game the player is tested through simulated senate hearings. The player must debate two
policies with the corporate lobbyist to save the think-tank’s reputation and defend the public against the
corrupt agenda.
Policy World provides error flagging, situational feedback, and penalties for errors. The game+tutor
version, which is the one that uses AI techniques for adaptation, is the same in all regards except that, as
mentioned above, it also includes step-level feedback and immediate error correction (as in most
intelligent tutoring systems - see VanLehn, 2006; 2011).
A total of 105 university students were recruited for a study with Policy World. Based on the results of
a series of ANOVAs, the game+tutor version resulted in more learning of policy analysis skills and selfreported competence, compared to the game-only version. A path analysis supported the claim that the
greater assistance provided by the game+tutor helped students learn analysis better, which increased
their feelings of competence, which in turn increased their interest in the game.

(a)

(b)

8

(c)

(d)

Figures 2(a), 2(b), 2(c), and 2(d): Policy World screenshots of the agents involved in the policy debate: (a) the
player; (b) the lobbyist; (c) the senator; and (d) the tutor (Figures from Easterday et al., 2017, reproduced by
permission from the first author)

As shown in Table 1, other AI-based adaptive games include Maths Garden, Prime Climb,
AutoThinking, Minerva, the Gamified SQL Tutor, ELEKTRA, iSTART-2, and Navigo. Mathematics is a key
focus area of games in this category, with Maths Garden (Klinkenberg et al., 2011) as a prime example.
Maths Garden is a single player game used to help K-8 students learn mathematics operations, such as
whole number addition, subtraction, multiplication and division. Students click on different flower beds to
try out the different mathematical operations and gain points (coins) by answering prompted questions
correctly and lose coins by answering incorrectly. The game reward comes in two forms: first, the flowers
in the various flower beds grow as the student makes progress; second, the coins earned from the math
tasks can be used to purchase virtual prizes. Maths Garden is distinguished as an AIED digital learning
game by adapting its problem content within each garden, using an item response model based on the
Elo (1978) rating system. The game has been empirically tested with over 3,500 participants and results
indicate that the Elo scoring model is highly correlated with an independent math test and students
become highly engaged with the game. Another AI adaptive digital learning game that is targeted at math
learning is Prime Climb (Conati et al., 2013). Prime Climb is a collaborative, two-player learning game in
which 5th and 6th grade students practice number factorization by climbing a series of “number
mountains,” composed of numbered hexagons. Players move to numbers in the hexagons that do not
share common factors with their partner’s number. The two players rely on and cooperate with one
another to reach the top of the mountain. Each player can make one or more moves before turning the
control to the other player. The game is adaptive through its hints, which are provided to assist the
students in climbing the mountain. Using a probabilistic student model, the game predicts when a student
doesn’t have the factorization skill required for a particular move. The game gives hints at incremental
levels of detail. Conati et al’s most important finding was that students with a positive attitude towards
help tend to pay attention to hint content after correct moves, while students with a negative attitude
towards help tend to pay attention to hints after incorrect moves, and students with a neutral attitude
towards help show limited attention to hints.
A second key focus of AIED digital learning games in this category has been computational thinking
and computer programming. For instance, AutoThinking (Hooshyar et al., 2021) is a recent adaptive,
single player digital learning game designed to promote elementary-age students’ skills and conceptual
knowledge in computational thinking (CT). In this game, the player takes the role of a mouse in a maze
seeking cheese and evading two cats. Players write “programs” using icons representing program steps
to create solutions to evade the cats. One of the two cats is “intelligent,” the other is random. After the
player completes a solution, the “intelligent cat” adapts using student log data and a Bayesian Network
algorithm that decides which algorithm it should use next to pursue the player and, if necessary, what
kind of feedback or hints to provide to the player. In a comparison to a more conventional, computerbased approach to learning CT, AutoThinking was found to be especially helpful to students with lower
prior knowledge. Hooshyar and colleagues also found that AutoThinking improved students’ attitude
toward CT more than the conventional approach. Due to the AI-based cat, AutoThinking also falls into the
“AI Character Interaction” category, which we introduce later in the chapter. A second CT example is
Minerva (Lindberg et al., 2018; 2016) a single player game designed to teach programming to elementary
school students, covering five concepts: input, output, math, loop and condition. In the game, players
control a robot to navigate puzzles and repair a damaged ship, while avoiding aliens and other obstacles.
The puzzles require players to learn the different programming concepts to achieve their task. The
adaptation of Minerva is to students’ “learning styles,” a concept that is controversial, since students

9

having different learning styles has been largely debunked in various learning science literature (Pashler
et al., 2008). Despite the perhaps misguided focus of this research, it is another example of “AI-based
Adaptation” and a programming focused game. As a final example of games focused on computational
thinking and programming, the Gamified SQL Tutor (Tahir et al., 2020) includes game elements beyond
the well-known, adaptive intelligent tutoring system, SQL Tutor, which teaches students the Standard
Query Language (SQL). The SQL Tutor has been shown in many studies to lead to learning benefits
(Mitrovic, 2012). The Gamified SQL Tutor was an attempt to gain additional learning benefits through
adding “badges” to the tutor related to goals, assessment, and challenges. For instance, if students
complete three problems in one session or five problems in one day, they receive goal badges. In a study
with 77 undergraduate students, Tahir and colleagues found that while Gamified SQL Tutor didn’t lead to
better learning outcomes than SQL Tutor, time on task was found to be a significant mediator between
badges and achievement in the gamified condition. This suggests that badges can motivate students to
spend more time learning with the SQL Tutor.
AI-based adaptive games have also been developed to support reading (iSTART-2 - Jackson &
McNamara, 2011; Jacovina et al., 2016; Navigo – Benton et al., 2021) and science learning (ELEKTRA Peirce et al., 2008). The highlights of these games include that iSTART-2 (previously called iStart-ME Jackson & McNamara, 2011) uses AI natural language techniques to assess student self-explanations
and adapt game play and feedback accordingly; Navigo relies on AI-based rules to ensure the learner is
at an appropriate reading level within the game, to be sure the language the student encounters is
diverse; and that the student generally progresses towards reading fluency. In ELEKTRA, which is
targeted at 13-to-15-year-old students, AI rules are also used to assess a student’s holistic game
experience and to execute adaptation that is both pedagogically helpful and non-invasive.
So what have we learned thus far from the research with AI-based adaptation of digital learning
games? First, as mentioned above, it is clear that research with intelligent tutoring systems (VanLehn,
2006; 2011) has created a blueprint and paved the way for how adaptation has been implemented, at
least thus far, in many digital learning games. The focus on adapting problems and feedback to the level
of understanding or skill exhibited by a student is, unsurprisingly, core to most of the games in this
category. Some of the most successful work in the “AI-based Adaptation” category of learning games,
such as with MathSpring and iStart-2, essentially started as research with intelligent tutoring systems that
later shifted into research with gamified intelligent tutors. Second, it is encouraging to see AI game
adaptation be successfully applied in a wide variety of domains, including mathematics (e.g., MathSpring,
Maths Garden), science (e.g., ELEKTRA), language learning (e.g., iStart-2, Navigo), computer science
(e.g., AutoThinking, Minerva) and policy analysis (e.g., Policy World). This suggests that adapting
instructional content is not constrained to any particular domain or game type. Finally, while adaptive
digital learning games appear to be largely focused on elementary to middle school age students – for
instance, with the games MathSpring, Minerva, Prime Climb, and AutoThinking – the games within this
category show that adaptive games can also be effective with older students, for instance, as shown with
Policy World and Gamified SQL Tutor.

3.2. AI-based Decision Support
AI-based decision support is another relatively common approach found in AIED digital learning
games. As opposed to “AI-based Adaptation,” these games allow the student to make their own choices
of problems to solve and game paths to follow, but with support from an AI recommender system. Often
these types of games employ a dashboard or open learner model (OLM - Bull & Kay, 2008; Bull, 2020) to
provide the choices to students, as well as data supporting their options. The games in this category are
often intended to support and explore self-regulated learning (SRL - Zimmerman & Schunk, 2008), in

10

particular, prompting students to carefully consider their learning trajectories and move thoughtfully
forward in the game and in their learning.
As in the previous section, we first describe in detail two representative “AI-based Decision Support”
games – one in the domain of mathematics (Decimal Point) and one in science (Physics Playground). We
also discuss how AI has been used for decision support in these games, as well as empirical results from
studies with the games. We then summarize and discuss other “AI-based Decision Support” games and,
finally, discuss what we have learned thus far from research with “AI-based Decision Support” games.
Decimal Point (Harpstead et al., 2019; Hou et al., 2020; 2021; McLaren et al., 2017; Nguyen et al.,
2018) is a web-based, single-player digital learning game that helps 5th through 7th grade students
reinforce their knowledge about decimal numbers and decimal operations. The game features an
amusement park metaphor with eight theme areas and 24 mini-games (Figure 3(a)) that target common
decimal misconceptions. The mini-games support playful problem-solving activities (e.g., entering a
haunted house, shooting objects in the wild west), each of which connects with one of five decimal
exercise types: number line, addition, sequence, bucket, and sorting. As an example, in the mini-game
Whack-A-Gopher (Figure 3(b)), students need to correctly “whack” the gophers, who pop up and retreat
at random times, in the order of their number labels. Students receive immediate feedback on their
answers and play until they get the correct answer. After each mini-game, students are prompted to
answer a self-explanation question to reinforce their understanding (Chi et al., 1994; 1989; Wylie & Chi,
2014). There have been a variety of studies of Decimal Point over the years, exploring issues such as
student agency (Nguyen et al., 2018), indirect control (Harpstead et al., 2019), and adaptive
recommendations (Hou et al., 2020; 2021).
One study with Decimal Point included an AI-based recommender system that recommends the next
mini-game to select from the game map to maximize either learning or enjoyment (Hou et al., 2020;
2021). In the learning-oriented version of Decimal Point, the student’s mastery of each decimal skill is
assessed in real time with Bayesian Knowledge Tracing (BKT - Corbett & Anderson, 1995). Students see
their mastery visualized through an open learner model (Bull, 2020) and are recommended to play more
mini-games in the two least mastered skills (Figure 3(c)). In the enjoyment-oriented version of the game,
the student’s rating of each mini-game round is collected after they finish it, and students are
recommended to play more mini-games of the type they like the most (Figure 3(d)). Decimal Point data
has also been used in EDM research that uncovers students’ learning difficulties (Nguyen et al., 2020), as
well as the relationship between in-game learning and posttest / delayed posttest performance (Nguyen
et al., 2021). Thus, the Decimal Point game is also found in the “Use of Learning Analytics ...” category of
AIED digital learning games.
A media comparison study (Mayer, 2019) with the original version of the Decimal Point game showed
a strong learning benefit over an intelligent tutoring system with the same content (McLaren et al., 2017).
For the version that included AI-based recommender discussed above, 196 5th and 6th grade students
participated in a study (Hou et al., 2020; 2021). Three game conditions were examined: a learningfocused condition featuring the BKT-based dashboard (Figure 3(c)), an enjoyment-focused condition
featuring the playful dashboard (Figure 3(d)), and a control condition with a neutral dashboard (i.e., a
dashboard that does not present either skill mastery or enjoyment scores to the student) (Figure 3(e)).
Results from the study indicated that the students in the enjoyment-focused group learned more
efficiently than the control group, and that females had higher learning gains than males across all
conditions. Post hoc analyses also revealed that the learning-focused group re-practiced the same minigames, while the enjoyment-focused group explored a wider variety of mini-games. These findings
suggest that adaptively emphasizing learning or enjoyment can result in distinctive gameplay behaviors
from students, and that Decimal Point can help bridge the gender gap in math education.

11

(a)

(c)

(b)

(d)

(e)

Figures 3(a), 3(b), 3(c), 3(d), and 3(e): The main game map on the top left allows to students to see the 24 minigames of Decimal Point (a), an example mini-game on the top right in which the student “whacks” moles in the order
of smallest to largest decimal number (b), while the recommender dashboard for the control version of the game (c),
the enjoyment-oriented version of the game (d) and the learning-oriented version of the game (e) are shown left to
right at the bottom. (Figures from Hou et al., 2021, reproduced by permission from the authors)

Physics Playground (PP - Shute et al., 2019; 2021; Shute, 2011) is a digital learning game designed to
enhance the physics understanding of middle to high school students. PP was originally designed to be a
single player game but has more recently been converted and also used in a collaborative learning mode

12

(Sun et al., 2020; 2022). The goal of students using PP is simple—hit a red balloon using a green ball and
various provided tools. In its first version, PP included only one type of game level: sketching. Using a
mouse or stylus, players could draw objects on the screen, create simple “machines” (i.e., ramp, lever,
pendulum, or springboard), and target the red balloon with the green ball. The second and most recent
version of the game incorporates a new task type, manipulation levels, where drawing is disabled with
players instead move the ball to the balloon using new tools, including (1) sliders related to mass, gravity,
and air resistance, (2) the ability to make the ball bounce by clicking the bounciness checkbox, and (3)
new sources of external force (e.g., a puffer, and static and dynamic blowers). PP includes stealth
assessment, in which real-time assessment is embedded in the learning environment, invisible to the
learner (Shute, 2011). The idea behind stealth assessment is to assess student skills, and how students
are dynamically advancing in those skills, without incurring the usual anxiety and time commitment that
comes from standard testing.
To engage and enhance student performance, Shute and colleagues (2019) recently added AI-based
learning supports and, in particular, an incentive and recommendation system called My Backpack. When
clicked, My Backpack provides information about the player’s progress and physics understanding, as
well as a space to customize game play (e.g., the type of ball they use). More specifically, the “Physics”
tab shows the estimated competency level for each targeted physics concept -- essentially an open
learner model, based on real-time stealth assessment. Because stealth assessment is used to
personalize content and adapt feedback (Shute et al., 2021), the Physics Playground is also in the “AIbased Adaptation” category discussed previously. In addition, Shute and colleagues (2015) have
performed post-gameplay analyses of student log data to investigate student affect and predictors of
learning outcomes while game playing; thus, PP is also in the “Use of Learning-Analytics …” category of
AIED digital learning games.
Shute and colleagues have conducted many studies with PP since its initial creation as “Newton’s
Playground” (Shute & Ventura, 2013). For example, Shute et al. (2015) reports a study with 137 8th and
9th grade students who played PP for 2 1/2 hours. The students had a significant increase in scores from
pretest to posttest, thus indicating that PP does indeed lead to physics learning. In post-gameplay
analyses, they also found evidence that (1) both the pretest and the in-game measure of student
performance significantly predicted learning outcomes and (2) a detector of frustration, a detector of
engaged concentration, and the pretest predicted the in-game measure of performance. Finally, they
found evidence for pathways from engaged concentration and frustration to learning, via the in-game
progress measure. More recently, Shute and colleagues (2021) conducted a study to explore the benefits
of the PP learning supports, such as My Backpack, a glossary, and animations of physics concepts. The
study included 263 ninth-to-eleventh graders who played PP for 4 hours. In this study, students were
randomly assigned to one of four conditions – an adaptive version of PP, in which a Bayesian algorithm
was used to present game levels to students according to their physics competencies; a linear version, in
which students followed a predetermined sequence of game levels; a free-choice version, in which the
students were presented the linear sequence of levels, but could skip levels, and a no-treatment control.
Surprisingly, there were no significant differences in learning between the four conditions. However,
Shute and colleagues found that stealth assessment was an accurate estimate of students’ physics
understanding (i.e., stealth assessment was highly correlated with external physics scores), and physics
animations were the most effective of eight supports in predicting both learning and in-game
performance. Like the Decimal Point study discussed previously, this study is an excellent example of
how digital learning games are becoming excellent platforms for pursuing various research questions,
such as whether self-regulated learning can be productive in a game context and what the effects of
various types of support are in game-based learning.

13

(a)

(b)
Figures 4(a) and 4(b): The figure at the top (4(a)) is an example of a student solving a Physics Playground problem
by drawing a lever with a weight on one side of the lever to hit the balloon. At the bottom (4(b)) is the My Backpack
view, which provides estimates of student progress, physics skill and concept understanding. (Figures from Shute et
al., 2021, reproduced by permission from the first author)

14

There are fewer learning games in the “AI-based Decision Support” category than in any of the other
learning games categories, but the few games that include decision support, typically in the form of an
open learner model, include Gamified Lynnette, TALENT, Keep Attention, and the Tactical Language and
Cultural Training System (TLCTS). Gamified Lynnette (Long & Aleven, 2014) is an example of a gamified
intelligent tutoring system, based on the linear equation tutor Lynnette (Waalkens et al., 2013). To extend
Lynette with game features – creating what we (but not the authors) call Gamified Lynnette – Long and
Aleven added two key features: (1) the possibility to re-practice problems, under student control, and (2)
rewards given to students based on their performance on individual problems. The two features are
connected (at least loosely) as students are encouraged to re-practice by earning rewards. The core AI
technique of Gamified Lynnette is its use of BKT (Corbett & Anderson, 1995) to assess students’ skills
and to support problem selection, either by the system (implementing mastery learning) or student
(through an OLM dashboard, thus, its inclusion in the “AI-based Decision Support” category). Gamified
Lynnette’s dashboard shows the student their rewards (i.e., badges) and allows students to select the
BKT-assessed problem to tackle next. In their first experiment with Gamified Lynnette, Long and Aleven
compared four versions of Gamified Lynnette, with and without re-practice enabled and with and without
rewards, as well as to standard Lynnette (i.e., with problems all system selected and no dashboard) and
DragonBox (http://www.dragonboxapp.com), a highly acclaimed and popular commercial digital learning
game that covers the same mathematics content as Gamified Lynnette. A total of 267 7th and 8th grade
students were randomly assigned to the six conditions, with 190 of those students finishing all activities
and thus being subject to analyses. Long and Aleven did not find a significant difference between the
different versions of Gamified Lynnette and the Lynnette control with respect to enjoyment or learning.
However, Gamified Lynnette students who had the freedom to re-practice problems, but were not given
rewards, performed significantly better on the post-tests than their counterparts who received rewards.
This suggests that adding game features – in this case rewards – does not always enhance learning. Of
particular note is that each of the Gamified Lynnette conditions led to more learning than the DragonBox
condition, indicating that just a small dose of game features added to more traditional learning technology
may be enough to lead to more learning versus a game. Long and Aleven (2018) later re-analyzed the
190 students of the Long and Aleven (2014) study, comparing the combined results of the five versions of
Lynnette (i.e., the four gamified and the original, non-gamified versions of Lynnette) with DragonBox.
They found that while students solved more problems and enjoyed playing DragonBox more, they learned
more using Lynnette and Gamified Lynnette. This is an important additional finding to that of Long and
Aleven (2014), as it shows that full-scale digital learning games, such as DragonBox, while often more
engaging, may not always lead to better learning outcomes than more traditional and/or gamified
technology. This finding further emphasizes the importance of conducting empirical studies of learning
games (something that had not been done previously with DragonBox) before setting them loose with
students in classrooms.
Another representative game in this category is TALENT (Maragos, 2013), a multiplayer adventure
game that helps high school students learn introductory programming. To play and learn with TALENT
students explore a game world, solving programming tasks as they proceed. They can chat with one
another to discuss their game progress or exchange programming advice. TALENT has an open learner
model based on information about the student’s in-game activities, such as navigation, tool usage, and
learning progress. Further, it proposes the next mission to undertake, based on the student’s current level
of game-assessed knowledge. The game also features a pedagogical agent whose role is to provide realtime hints (and thus TALENT is also in the “AI Character Interaction” category). A study of TALENT was
conducted with 65 high school students, over a period of 8 weeks. An experimental condition in which
students played TALENT was compared to a group of students that attended traditional lectures. While
both groups improved from pretest to posttest, the experimental group had significantly higher posttest
scores. However, given the stark comparison of traditional classroom instruction with the TALENT game,

15

including collaboration and an OLM, it is not clear which feature, or combination of features, led to the
better learning outcomes of the game-playing group.
Two other games in the “AI-based Decision Support” category are Keep Attention and TLCTS. Keep
Attention (Hocine, 2019; Hocine et al., 2019) is a learning game for children with attention deficit
disorders and trains attention skills (Hocine et al., 2019), as well as self-regulation skills (Hocine, 2019).
The base game operates by first using basic tasks to assess students’ attention skills, followed by
personalizing their gameplay training – using the assessed skills as a guide – in a variety of game
contexts (e.g., a zoo, card playing, outer space). For instance, in the zoo context players are prompted to
rescue animals, while avoiding insects and monsters. The basic assessment is composed of selective
attention tasks that prompt players, under time pressure, to select given targets in different contexts,
while avoiding obstacles (distractors). In one version of the game, an open learner model (OLM) was
developed to explore self-regulated learning by allowing users to reflect upon their actions during
assessment and make decisions about their subsequent gameplay. The OLM uses a visual presentation
of the player's performance, analyzed using AI techniques. To gamify the player’s interaction with the
OLM, Keep Attention prompts the player to predict their performance in the assessment exercises and
levels based on an interactive questionnaire that provides feedback. Through the OLM, players can
decide whether to accept or not the system’s decisions on personalized gameplay. Unlike most of the
other learning games reviewed in this chapter, no large-scale empirical studies have been conducted with
Keep Attention. However, in a pilot study of the open learner model with 16 middle school students
(Hocine, 2019) it was found that without the OLM, subjects found it difficult to assess their attention level,
and consequently to choose the appropriate level of difficulty in the game context. Conversely, it
appeared that what students learned about their attention from the OLM helped them during subsequent
gameplay. While the TLCTS game is more representative of the “AI Character Interaction” category, given
its extensive use of interactive NPCs to support language and culture learning, it also uses an AI
recommender system to give learners advice on which lessons and game episodes to tackle next. TLCTS
is described in more detail in the next section,
As with other forms of educational technology, open-learner models and recommender systems in
digital learning games are designed to support and enhance students’ self-regulated learning skills,
ultimately leading, it is hoped, to better learning outcomes. OLMs seem especially appropriate for digital
game contexts, given that computer-based games often allow players to make their own decisions about
the next game level, challenge, or pathway to pursue during play. The difference in digital learning games
is that player choices are not only about engagement and enjoyment but also about optimizing learning
outcomes. So far, the results have been inconclusive regarding the benefits of OLMs in digital learning
games. For instance, the learning-focused OLM in Decimal Point did not lead to clear learning benefits
over the enjoyment-focused OLM; in fact, the enjoyment-focused OLM led to more efficient learning than
for the students in the control group. Also, the Physics Playground OLM (i.e., My Backpack) may have
helped students but did not lead conclusively to better learning. There is at least a hint that the dashboard
of Gamified Lynnette may have been responsible for better learning outcomes, given the better learning
outcomes of the Gamified Lynnette with a dashboard but without rewards over Gamified Lynnette with
rewards. Even so, further study, focused on testing the dashboard, would be necessary to confirm the
benefits of a dashboard. In short, the jury is still out on the impact and benefits of AI-supported OLMs and
recommender systems in the context of digital learning games. Testing OLMs and recommender systems
with digital learning games is perhaps more challenging and complicated than with other learning
technologies, given the trade-offs and tension between engagement and learning inherent in digital
learning games.

16

3.3. AI Character Interaction
AI-based character interaction involves the use of Non-Player Characters, commonly called NPCs,
engaging and interacting with students as they play a digital learning game. In the context of digital
learning systems and games, these characters are also sometimes called “pedagogical agents” (Johnson
& Lester, 2018): virtual characters that are part of learning scenarios and engage in rich interactions with
students. Some games that have already been discussed in this chapter also fall into this category,
including MathSpring (Arroyo et al., 2013; 2014), which uses NPCs to provide socio-emotional support to
students, and the Tactical Language and Culture Training System (Johnson, 2010), which was briefly
discussed in the previous section, and which uses NPCs to help adult trainees understand foreign
language and culture. “AI Character Interaction” games often employ AI in the form of Natural Language
Processing (NLP), as well as machine learning to develop the language capabilities and affect of such
characters.
In this section we describe in detail three highly representative “AI Character Interaction” games,
across the disparate domains of microbiology (Crystal Island), language and cultural instruction (the
Tactical Language and Culture Training System – TLCTS), and programming (TurtleTalk). We describe
the NPCs that have been implemented in those games and how AI has been used to bring the NPCs to
life as interactive pedagogical agents with human learners. In some cases, in particular with Crystal
Island, we also discuss other ways that AI has been employed in the game. We also summarize the
results attained from experimenting with these three games, ranging from extensive and substantial, in
the case of Crystal Island, to very preliminary, in the case of TurtleTalk. We also briefly discuss other
games that fall within the category of “AI Character Interaction” games and conclude by discussing what
has been learned thus far from “AI Character Interaction” game research.
Crystal Island (Lester et al., 2013) is a single player, narrative learning game designed for the domain
of microbiology, typically targeted at late middle school students (but even university students have been
a target population). The game features a science mystery situated on a remote tropical island (Figure
5(a)). Within the narrative of Crystal Island, the student plays the role of a medical field agent attempting
to discover the identity of an infectious disease plaguing the island inhabitants. To solve the mystery, the
student collects data and symptoms, forms hypotheses, and tests those hypotheses by interviewing a
number of NPCs on the island, including a camp nurse, the camp cook, and virus and bacterial scientists.
The student’s learning is scaffolded by interaction with the NPCs (Figure 5(b)) and a diagnosis worksheet
(Figure 5(c)). When the student makes an incorrect diagnosis, the camp nurse identifies the error and
provides feedback. The student successfully completes the game when they correctly identify the illness
and specify an appropriate treatment.
A variety of AI techniques have been employed and tested with Crystal Island, including narrativecentered tutorial planning (Lee et al., 2011; 2012), student knowledge modeling (Rowe & Lester, 2010),
and student goal recognition and affect recognition models (Sabourin et al., 2011). Most of these AI
directions have been aimed at making the camp nurse smarter and more adaptable to and supportive of
students playing the game. For instance, the narrative-centered tutorial planning uses a dynamic decision
network (Dean & Kanazawa, 1989), to update the beliefs of the NPCs, and to select actions that
maximize expected tutorial utility. For student modeling and affect recognition, Lester and colleagues
developed a dynamic Bayesian network that connects students goals (e.g., mastery or performance) with
emotions (e.g., boredom, confusion) and actions (e.g., notes taken, tests run) (Rowe & Lester, 2010). The
game’s data has also recently been analyzed with deep learning techniques to build student models from
log data and reflection texts (Geden et al., 2021), to recognize student goals from game events and eye
tracking (Min et al., 2017), and to enable data-driven and interactive narrative personalization (Wang et
al., 2017). These data mining studies place Crystal Island also in the “Use of Learning-Analytics ...” game
category still to be discussed.

17

Crystal Island is one of the earliest developed and most prolific AIED learning games; it has been the
subject of many empirical studies, exploring a variety of issues – like Decimal Point and Physics
Playground it has proven to be an excellent research platform. Here, we cite and summarize just four
studies. An early observational study conducted by Rowe et al. (2011), in which the goal was to
investigate the synergistic impact of engagement and learning, 150 students played Crystal Island.
Students achieved significant learning gains from pre to posttest, providing evidence that the game is
effective in engaging learners and supporting learning. In an experiment comparing three narrativecentered tutorial planning models, 150 eighth-grade students used Crystal Island, completing a pre- and
posttest (Lee et al., 2012). While it was found that all students learned, only students in the “full
guidance” condition (compared to intermediate and minimal guidance conditions) achieved significant
learning gains. A study that did not yield positive learning outcomes for Crystal Island was conducted by
Adams and colleagues (2012) in which students using Crystal Island were compared to students viewing
a slideshow with the same microbiology materials. The Crystal Island group performed much worse than
the slideshow group on a subsequent test of infectious disease with an effect size of -0.31. Finally, in
Sawyer et al. (2017), Lester’s lab explored the concept of agency, that is, student (versus system) control
within a game. In this study, 105 college-age students were randomly assigned to one of three agency
conditions: high agency, which allowed students to navigate to island locations in any order; low agency,
which restricted students to a prescribed order of navigation, and no agency, in which students simply
watched a video of an expert playing Crystal Island. They found that students in the low agency condition
attempted more incorrect submissions but also attained significantly higher learning gains. Their results
suggest that limiting agency in their game (and possibly in other games, as well) can improve learning
performance but at the potential cost of undesirable student behaviors, such as a propensity for guessing.

(a)

(b)

(c)
Figures 5(a), 5(b), and 5(c): The locations on Crystal Island where the student can visit to solve the infectious
disease mystery (5(a)). The student interacts with AI-infused NPCs, such as the camp nurse and patients (5(b)). A

18

diagnosis worksheet scaffolds students learning; they can record their findings in the worksheet (5(c)). (Figures from
Taub et al., 2020 and Lester et al., 2013, reproduced by permission from the authors)

The Tactical Language and Culture Training System (TLCTS - Johnson, 2010) is a virtual learning
environment that helps learners acquire basic communication skills and cultural understanding of foreign
countries. This is done through interactive and practical lessons. TLCTS modules have been deployed to
teach Arabic, Chinese and French, among other languages and cultures. Each module includes three
major components: Skill Builder, Arcade Game, and Mission Game. In the Skill Builder, learners practice
vocabulary and phrases, and complete assessment quizzes that require mastery of spoken language. In
the Arcade Game, learners give voice commands in the target language to control the behaviors of game
characters. In the Mission Game, learners speak on behalf of their characters to interact with in-game
NPCs. All TLCTS content is highly task-based and promotes hands-on practice, while leveraging game
elements to help learners overcome the motivational barrier of language learning.
TLCTS incorporates AI dialog models to support robust spoken dialog with NPCs; these models can
interpret the learner’s verbal and non-verbal gestures and control the NPCs’ responses accordingly. More
specifically, the game uses automated speech recognition to provide immediate feedback, both on simple
repeat-and-recall tasks and on more complex dialog exercises. The speech recognition is enabled
through an underlying acoustic model, trained on a combination of native speech and learner speech to
ensure an acceptable recognition rate. TLCTS also uses AI to maintain student models to track students’
mastery of targeted language skills throughout game play; these models provide learners with
recommendations on the lessons and game episodes to undertake next (thus, this game is also in the
“AI-based Decision Support” category).
Three evaluations have been conducted on TLCTS, all of Iraqi Arabic language and culture. The first
study involved 89 marines, each of whom underwent four hours of self-paced computer-based training
each week over three months. The second study recruited eight (8) military personnel who spent eight
hours of TLCTS training per day, over five days. The third study had 268 participants, who had 28 hours
of training with TLCTS. All three studies yielded significant increases in knowledge of Iraqi Arabic
language, as measured by an independently constructed posttest; in two of the studies, participants also
reported significant increases in speaking and listening self-efficacy.

Figure 6: An active dialog in TLCTS. Trainees learn how to use language and act culturally appropriate when
interviewing Iraqi civilians. © Alelo Inc. Reprinted with permission

19

The final game we’ll discuss in detail in the “AI Character Interaction” category is TurtleTalk (Jung et
al., 2019), a single player, web-based programming game that interacts with learners through voice
recognition and speakers (See Figure 7). The children’s’ utterances are converted directly into code. The
game focuses on the programming topics of sequencing and iteration, both of which are fundamental
programming constructs. In the case of sequencing, child users learn that a program runs in a sequence
of steps, where an action, or step, leads to the next ordered action. In the case of iteration, children learn
that programs often contain loops of steps that are executed repeatedly. The child and TurtleTalk
communicate with one another in a turn taking manner to control the conversation and help the child
focus on their given tasks. TurtleTalk provides hints to help the child decide what to do, but it does not
appear that, as of this writing, the authors have grounded the pedagogical model underlying the game in
established learning science.
Although there have been other computer gamified environments for learning programming, such as
Scratch (Resnick et al., 2009) and Blockly (Fraser et al., 2013), TurtleTalk brings a new twist: an AIinfused NPC – the turtle – that guides and helps children through its voice and voice understanding. The
Turtle appears on the screen and moves onto blocks according to voice commands, which are converted
into programming code by a neural network.
Thus far, however, only a small pilot study of TurtleTalk has been conducted. Eight participants, 6 to 9
years of age, were recruited for the study. Players were surveyed after playing the game to learn about
their playing experience (there was no pretest or posttest). The general results (which are, of course, very
preliminary and based on minimal data) are: (1) Children appear to learn programming easily, enjoyably,
and confidently with TurtleTalk; (2) Children understand the key constructs of programming through
TurtleTalk; and (3) Voice interaction allows children to become more immersed in the game.

>
Figure 7: A child listening to TurtleTalk’s questions and then commanding the turtle NPC to act through voice
command. (Figure from Jung et al., 2019, reproduced by permission from the authors)

Other digital learning games in the “AI Character Interaction” category include ELIA, ECHOES,
Squares Family, TALENT (already discussed), and Betty’s Brain. ELIA (Emotions for Learning and
Intelligent Assessment – Kaczmarek & Petroviča, 2018) is a single player game targeted at university
students for learning about artificial intelligence. The game is patterned after the famous “Who wants to
be a Millionaire” television game show in which students try to win a “million-dollar prize” by correctly
answering a series of questions. ELIA integrates game mechanics, most importantly an on-screen NPC
that supports the student, with an underlying intelligent tutor. The game uses facial expression recognition
software, supported by a neural network, to help in identifying student emotions and deciding on a
tutoring approach. ELIA analyzes and classifies students through a pre-game questionnaire,

20

subsequently selecting an appropriate supporting NPC (friend, expert, coach, or evaluator) and teaching
strategy (mastery or performance). During game play questions to the student are adapted with the aid of
the Emotion API, a commercially available API from Affectiva2, which is based on more than 6 million face
videos collected from 87 countries. Each of the supporting NPCs have their own (different) rules for
tutoring based on different perceived emotions and student progress. In a study with 240 university
students, a game-based condition in which 87 students used ELIA, compared to a paper-based,
business-as-usual condition with the same content, showed that the game led to lower posttest scores.
However, the game also led to increased motivation and engagement for lower-performing students,
prompting the authors to suggest that the game still could be beneficial for that class of students.
ECHOES (Bernardini et al., 2014) is a digital learning game designed to train young children with Autism
Spectrum Conditions (ASCs) to acquire social communication skills. An intelligent virtual character, Andy,
guides and teaches children, by playing the role of both a peer and a tutor, through a multi-touch LCD
display with eye tracking. All activities take place in a sensory garden populated by Andy with interactive
magic objects that react in unusual ways when touched by either the children or the agent. Children
practice two forms of activities: goal-oriented, where they follow steps with an identifiable end-goal, and
cooperative turn-taking, where they take turns exploring the garden with Andy to promote social
reciprocity. Andy is also responsible for fostering the children’s initiative and exposing them to positive
peer interactions. Andy employs a domain-independent architecture FAtiMA (Dias & Paiva, 2005) to
display one of 22 emotions, based on its assessment of the current events. The agent’s back-end has a
pedagogical component that monitors its interaction with the child, and a “child model,” which assesses in
real time the child’s cognitive and emotional state. ECHOES was tested in a small study of twenty-nine
(29) children 4 to 14 years old from the U.K. with Autism Spectrum Conditions (ASC) and/or other
disabilities. While no significant transfer of increased social responsiveness or initiations to real-world
contexts were observed across all children, the experimental results showed that the number of initiations
made by the children when first using ECHOES wass significantly less than the number of initiations
made during the final session.
The last two games in the “AI Character Interaction” category, Squares Family and Betty’s Brain,
employ an instructional paradigm known as “teachable agents” (TA - Brophy et al., 1999; Chase et al.,
2009; Leelawong & Biswas, 2008). Teachable agents technology draws on the social metaphor of a
student teaching a computer agent, which in turn can help the student themselves learn. TA is based on
the theories of learning-by-teaching (Bargh & Schul, 1980; Palthepu et al., 1991) and the protégé effect
(Chase et al., 2009), in which students are coaxed to work harder to learn for their TAs than on their own.
Squares Family (Pareto, 2009; 2014; Sjödén et al., 2017) is a two-player math card game (either two
humans or a human and computer player) designed to teach elementary school students a conceptual
understanding of mathematics and mathematical reasoning, in particular of positive and negative integer
operations. The game prompts discussion between pairs, using a graphical metaphor of colored squares
that denote 100s, 10s, and 1s and collected squares that go into virtual boxes. A key feature of the game
is that students train an on-screen teachable agent (TA) as they play the game (e.g., Pareto, 2014;
Sjödén et al., 2017). The AI component of Squares Family lies in how the TA “learns” as the game is
played. Just as a human learner, the teachable agent asks questions of the student during game play to
complement and build its knowledge. The TA will only ask questions that are, according to its
understanding, within the student’s zone of proximal development (Vygotsky, 1978). Pareto (2014)
reports a three-month study in which 314 students played Squares Family and taught their teachable
agents, while 129 took a standard math class without the game (i.e., the control). Results showed that
there was a significant learning advantage in playing Squares Family compared to the control, also
suggesting that young students can act as successful tutors. In another study, Sjödén and colleagues
(2017) analyzed the anonymous log data of 163 fourth-graders playing Squares Family competitively
2

https://www.affectiva.com/

21

against the computer from nine classes in a school in Sweden (age 10–11, total of 3,983 games). Results
showed that students who tutored a TA had higher performance than students who played without a TA.
We note that the final game in the “AI Character Interaction” category, Betty’s Brain (Biswas et al.,
2016), unlike Squares Family, is more purely a TA learning technology than a game. However, because
of the rich interaction between students and agents, as well as the goals of Betty’s Brain, which arguably
fit our earlier definition of digital learning games, for the purposes of this chapter, we include it as a
learning game3. Betty’s Brain trains students in modeling chains of cause-and-effect relationships using a
concept map that students develop. Students actively engage with an agent named Betty in three
activities: teaching Betty to answer hypothetical questions about their concept maps, Betty reasons in
real-time visually in the concept map (which helps to remediate student knowledge), and Betty is quizzed
by a mentor NPC at the end of a session. By interacting with and guiding Betty, the idea is for students to
update their concept maps and, along the way, learn more about cause and effect. Betty’s use of AI
includes a breadth-first search of the concept map to deduce relationships in the student’s concept map
(Leelawong & Biswas, 2008). Betty also displays AI-controlled affect – e.g., happiness, disappointment –
as she solves problems. Other uses of AI with Betty’s Brain include the application of learning analytics to
improve the game (Segedy et al., 2014; Kinnebrew et al., 2014) – Hence, Betty’s Brain’s inclusion in the
fourth and final category of AI in digital learning games, “Use of Learning-Analytics (LA) ...”). Betty’s Brain
has been subject to a variety of studies including one by Segedy et al. (2015) in which 98 6th grade
students used Betty’s Brain to learn about two topics: climate change and human thermo-regulation.
Results demonstrated learning gains by students in multiple-choice and short-answer item questions, but
not on causal reasoning, causal link extraction, or quiz evaluation items.
It can be concluded that AI Character Interaction research has had some clear successes (Johnson,
2010; Pareto, 2014; Sawyer et al., 2017) in making games more realistic, engaging, and motivating, as
well as leading to better learning outcomes. However, AI-supported characters in a game context have
not always led to better learning outcomes. For instance, as earlier mentioned, in one Crystal Island study
students playing the game did not learn more than from a slideshow of the same material (Adams et al.,
2012). As another example, ELIA motivated students more than a business-as-usual condition with the
same content but led to worse learning outcomes (Kaczmarek & Petroviča, 2018). The challenge in
creating interactive, engaging, and helpful NPCs that lead to learning is clearly very high – perhaps higher
than any other challenge in AIED digital learning games – thus leading to mixed results thus far. We’ll
return to this issue, and how it might be addressed, in the “Future Directions” section of this chapter.
Another interesting and unique aspect of research in this area is how it can support the investigation of
affect during instruction, both the affect of NPCs and that of students interacting with the game. For
instance, some of the work with Crystal Island has been aimed, at least in part, at assessing student
affect while game playing (Sabourin et al., 2011). Arroyo and colleagues (2013; 2014) have shown that
an NPC can promote positive affect in students. In short, AI Character Interaction research is likely to
continue to be a very interesting and fruitful direction for AIED digital learning game research.

3.4. Use of Learning Analytics (LA) and/or Educational Data
Mining (EDM) for Game Analysis and Improvement
Learning analytics and educational data mining have led to important insights into learner behavior
and affect while playing games (e.g., Alonso-Fernandez et al., 2019; Baker et al., 2007; Nguyen et al.,
2020; 2019; O’Rourke, Haimovitz et al., 2014; Wang et al., 2019). For instance, in the learning game
Decimal Point, EDM has helped in identifying students’ learning difficulties (Nguyen et al., 2020), as well
3

We contacted Gautam Biswas, the leader of the group that developed Betty’s Brain, and he also noted anecdotally
that during talks he has given, audiences have suggested that Betty’s Brain could be viewed as a game.

22

as the relationship between in-game learning and posttest / delayed posttest performance (Nguyen et al.,
2019). An example finding is that while problems involving a number line tend to be the most difficult to
master, performance on these problems is predictive of performance on the delayed posttest.
Engagement and affect have also been a focus of AIED analyses in the use of digital learning games,
given the hypothesis that these constructs are mediators to learning with games. As students interact with
games, they typically display a variety of affective responses, including delight, engaged concentration,
happiness, boredom, confusion, and frustration (Graesser et al., 2014; D’Mello, 2013), and learners’
affective state has often been shown to be correlated with their learning processes (e.g., D’Mello, 2013;
Shute et al., 2015).
Learning analytics and educational data mining have also helped in designing, redesigning, and
extending digital learning games. Often, this involves using machine learning as a means of analyzing
and improving games (Shute et al., 2015; Harpstead & Aleven, 2015). Many of the techniques used for
player modeling, analysis, and game improvement in AIED digital learning games are derived from
research on intelligent tutoring systems (Mousavinasab et al., 2021). For example, learning curve
analysis, which is based on the power law of practice (Card et al., 1983) and is often used in intelligent
tutoring system research (Martin et al, 2005), has been used to model the acquisition of fluent skills in the
game Zombie Division. This analysis provided insights into student skills that suggests (re)design of the
game and its content (Baker et al., 2007). Likewise, Harpstead and Aleven (2015) used learning curves to
help in analyzing student strategies and guiding redesign of the Beanstalk game.
In what follows, we describe in detail two games – Refraction and Zombie Division – for which postgameplay learning analytics and/or data mining helps us both better understand student behavior and
learning in game play and suggest ideas on how to revise, improve, and/or extend the games. We also
discuss the specific way learning analytics and data mining was applied to data collected from those
games. We then summarize and briefly discuss other games in the “Use of Learning Analytics (LA) …”
category. Finally, we discuss what learning analytics and data mining has revealed to us more generally
about learning from digital games. Note that some digital learning games for which learning analytics
and/or EDM have been applied – namely, Betty’s Brain, Crystal Island, and Decimal Point – are not
further discussed here; information about how learning analytics or data mining was used in analyzing
these games is provided in earlier sections.
The first game we describe in detail is Refraction (O’Rourke et al., 2015; 2016; O’Rourke, Ballweber et
al., 2014; O’Rourke, Haimovitz et al., 2014), a single player, puzzle game designed to teach fraction
concepts to elementary school students. To play, a child interacts with a grid that contains laser sources,
target spaceships, and asteroids (See Figure 8). The goal of the game is to split a laser shooter into
correct fractional amounts to shoot target spaceships. The student must, at the same time, avoid moving
asteroids. To win, a player must accurately shoot all the target spaceships at the same time (i.e., correctly
satisfy the fractions). Since its release in 2012, Refraction has been played hundreds of thousands of
times on the educational website Brainpop.com. O’Rourke and colleagues modified the game to
experiment with the concept of a growth mindset, the theory that intelligence is malleable and can be
improved with effort (Dweck, 2006; Heyman & Dweck, 1998). A “fixed mindset,” on the other hand, is a
theory stating that intelligence is set and unchangeable.
O’Rourke and colleagues extended Refraction to reward players with “brain points” when they
exhibited growth mindset behavior, such as effort, use of strategy, and incremental progress (O’Rourke,
Haimovitz et al. 2014). Heuristics were used in real time play to detect and reward positive behavioral
patterns. The heuristics were developed by first observing various patterns in student play. O’Rourke and
colleagues then developed heuristic rules to identify those patterns during actual gameplay. For example,
one rule identifies when a player solves a math sub-problem (incremental progress). Developing handauthored rules -- versus machine-learned or statistical rules -- was key, because the rules needed to be
semantically meaningful, providing feedback to students. The work of O’Rourke, Bellweber et al. (2014)
also developed different “hints” versions of Refraction, in the intelligent tutoring tradition (VanLehn, 2006;

23

2011). (Surprisingly, in an experiment involving over 50,000 students, they found that students who used
a no-hint version of the game learned more than students in four hint conditions - hint content (concrete
versus abstract) and hint presentation (by level versus reward).)
The critical way that Refraction uses AI, however, is in its post-game quantitative analyses of student
behavior. Use of Refraction was evaluated through an iterative series of studies. First, the “brain points”
version of Refraction was compared to a control version that awarded “level points” for each completed
level (performance). Using educational data mining techniques, this study showed that players in the
“brain points” version persisted longer and exhibited more productive learning behaviors than those in the
control (O’Rourke, Haimovitz et al. 2014). A second study, again comparing the “brain points” and “level
points” versions of Refraction, showed, again applying data mining, that students who were younger,
male, and of higher income were more engaged in the game (O’Rourke et al., 2015). In a third study, five
different versions of “brain points” Refraction were compared, each of which removed features to isolate
the impact of a particular aspect of the intervention (e.g. the brain points, growth mindset animation, a
summary screen). The results of this study showed that brain points are not effective when awarded
randomly, demonstrating that brain points are successful precisely because they are given to students in
response to productive learning behaviors (O’Rourke et al., 2016). In short, this series of studies shows
how quantitative and data mining analyses can be used to better understand how game features impact
an educational game’s effectiveness – and, in turn, point to how to improve the game.

Figure 8: A level of Refraction. The goal of the game is to use the elements on the right to split lasers into fractional
pieces and redirect them to satisfy the target spaceships. All spaceships must be satisfied at the same time to win.
(Figure from O’Rourke et al., 2014, reproduced by permission from the first author)

Zombie Division (Habgood & Ainsworth, 2011) is a single player, 3D adventure game developed to
help children 7 to 11 years old learn division and number patterns. The player in the game uses different
weapons to kill attacking zombies by mathematically dividing into whole parts the numbers displayed on
the zombies (See Figure 9). The game has different levels, as in many games, with approximately 20
attacking zombies per level. The game also includes game mechanics in which players explore a
dungeon and collect keys; however these are not integrated with the mathematical content of the game.
Players can get two types of in-game help: a magical book of times tables (the multiplication grid) and an
NPC that provides helpful feedback.

24

Habgood and Ainsworth (2011) report two studies that explore whether intrinsic or extrinsic integration
of academic content into a digital learning game leads to better learning and which version of the game
students prefer. In the intrinsic version of the game (Figure 9), the player attacks zombies through the
game mechanic of whole number division, as described above. In an extrinsic version of the game, the
game is played without the numbered weapons and zombies. Instead, the same division problems are
presented to students to solve between levels (i.e., completely outside of the game). A control condition
was also included in which students played Zombie Division without the numbered weapons and
numbered zombies or division problems presented between levels. In study 1, a total of 58 kids, 7 to 11
years old, participated, 20 in the extrinsic, 20 in the intrinsic, and 18 in the control condition. The intrinsic
condition led to significantly better learning outcomes on both a posttest and delayed posttest than both
the extrinsic and control conditions. In study 2, 16 children had the free choice to play either the intrinsic
or extrinsic version of Zombie Division and for as long as they desired.This study demonstrated an
overwhelming preference for the intrinsic version of the game; the kids in the intrinsic version spent on
average more than 7 times longer playing than the extrinsic version. Essentially, the Habgood and
Ainsworth results demonstrate that integrating math content directly into a game leads to both better
enjoyment and learning outcomes than playing the same game, yet doing math separately.
While the Zombie Division game itself has no AI functionality, a learning curve analysis by Baker et al.
(2007) was used to model skill fluency in the game and to suggest useful modifications. In particular, this
analysis found, among other things, that students quickly and successfully gained fluency in divisibility by
2, 4 and 5, but not by 3, implying that future versions of the game should include extra support for the
division-by-3 skill. In short, this is a stereotypical example of using EDM as a means for both assessing
student behavior and subsequently suggesting changes to the game.

Figure 9: This is a screenshot of the intrinsic version of the Zombie Division game. The player’s avatar is in the
foreground and chooses weapons from the top of the screen to attack zombies as they appear. The goal is to choose
weapons that are equal divisors of the zombies, which have numbers on their chests. The “magical book of times
tables” is shown in the upper right. The hearts indicate the health of the player, the skull on the bottom right shows
how many zombies are yet to appear in this level. (Figure provided by M. P. Jacob Habgood, reproduced by
permission)

In general, a wide variety of AI, data mining, and statistical techniques have been used to investigate
and model students’ engagement and affective states. For example, Shute et al. (2015) used structural

25

equation modeling to discover that in-game performance playing the Physics Playground (discussed
earlier) can be predicted by pretest data, frustration, and engaged concentration. In the game Prime
Climb (also discussed earlier), Conati and Zhou (2002) experimented with using a Dynamic Decision
Network to model students’ emotional reaction during their interaction with the game, based on a
cognitive theory of emotion. Data from the BROMP protocol -- in which observational data is used to build
machine-learned models of affect (Ocumpaugh et al., 2015) -- has been used to develop affect detectors
for several digital learning games or game-like instructional systems, including TC3Sim (Henderson et al.,
2020a, 2020b), Physics Playground (Shute et al., 2015), and Reasoning Mind (Ocumpaugh et al., 2013).
Eye-tracking and other sensor technologies have been used to capture students’ physiological data (e.g.,
in Prime Climb - Conati et al., 2013), which are increasingly used to create deep learning models that can
infer students’ affective states (Henderson et al., 2020a, 2020b; Loderer et al., 2019; Wiggins et al.,
2018a; 2018b).
Other learning games for which learning analytics and data mining have been used for analyzing game
behavior and/or game improvement include Battleship Numberline, Heroes of Math Island, ST Math,
Zoombinis, Beanstalk, and Downtown: A Subway Adventure. Battleship Numberline (Lomas et al., 2011;
2012; 2013), a single-player game that gives players practice in estimating where whole numbers,
fractions and decimals fall on a number line, has been, for instance, used to examine student
engagement. A large-scale study with the game, involving approximately 70,000 players, found that
players were more engaged and played longer when the game was easier, contradicting the common
assumption that maximum engagement occurs at a moderate difficulty level (Lomas et al., 2013). Conati
and Gutica (2016) developed a variety of machine learned detectors of affect for players of the game
Heroes of Math Island, a narrative math game for middle schools students targeted at learning about
divisibility, prime numbers, and number decomposition. Their ultimate aim was to detect student affect
while playing the game, using a camera, and then to adjust the affect of a supporting NPC (a monkey) to
help students while learning. Based on a small study of 15 students, Conati and Gutica were able to
identify the frequencies of a wide range of emotions, but also noted the steep challenges of labeling game
data to identify emotions. In the area of using EDM and statistical analysis for helping to improve a game
and its content, Peddycord-Liu and colleagues (2017; 2019) experimented with ST Math, a single player
learning game that uses spatial puzzles to teach mathematical concepts. They uncovered predictive
relationships between different objectives and math concepts. For instance, they used linear regression to
identify the most predictive prior objectives. In a study of 1,565 3rd grade students, Peddycord-Liu et al
were able to use their techniques to identify the skills that students needed more practice on, a redesign
of lessons within the game, and clusters of difficult problems that should be separated to balance
students’ pacing through the game. Rowe and colleagues (2020; 2021) conducted EDM analyses of
Zoombinis (Hancock & Osterweil, 1996), a single-player game designed to help students learn
computational thinking (CT), to better understand student behaviors in playing the game. For instance,
Rowe et al. (2021) investigated the frequency of systematic testing and trial and error, common CT
constructs, by hand labelling the data of 194 students, building machine-learned detectors, and then
validating the detectors with 54 additional students. Harpstead and Aleven (2015) applied learning
analytics to learn more about and to modify Beanstalk, a single person learning game for 5-to-8-year-olds
based on the folktale of Jack and the Beanstalk and designed to teach the physical properties of a
balance beam. They used learning curves to analyze the in-game behavior of 177 students playing
Beanstalk. Their analysis suggested a game redesign related to a previously unidentified shallow game
strategy that “wins” but does not reflect an understanding of the underlying balance beam principle.
Finally, Cano and colleagues (2016; 2018) used learning analytics to investigate Downtown: A Subway
Adventure, a spy game where a single player must discover the location and time of their enemy’s
gathering by navigating the Madrid subway and collecting clues along the way. The goal of the game is to
train students with intellectual disabilities to use the public subway system. In a study of 51 adults with

26

varying intellectual disabilities, they found, for instance, that students’ prior experience with transportation
training did not have an impact on their game performance, but those who played video games regularly
performed better than their counterparts. In summary, a wide variety of techniques have been used to
analyze student gameplay and affect in the use of AIED digital learning games, including machinelearned detectors, learning curve analysis, BKT analysis, deep learning, eye-tracking, video, and linear
regression. All of these tools in the AIED “toolbox” have uncovered important findings about how students
interact with learning games, as well as how we could make the games better, both in game mechanics
and content. Note also that this category of AIED digital learning games is the most active, with the
largest number of games having been analyzed (15).

4. Summary of What Have We Learned From
Research with AIED Digital Learning Games
This chapter has presented a variety of AIED digital learning games that employ AI in various ways
and that have been applied to many different topic areas, from math to science, computer science,
cultural understanding, language learning, and social communication. Many of the games that have been
presented in this chapter use AI to adapt game play, content, and help in a manner similar to what is
often seen in intelligent tutoring systems (e.g., iStart-2, MathSpring, Policy World, Prime Climb). Other
learning games use AI to provide useful real-time information, in the form of learning analytics, to help
students make their own instructional decisions (e.g., Decimal Point, Physics Playground, TALENT) and
to explore self-regulated learning. Still others include AI-supported non-player characters (NPCs) to guide
and motivate students in their learning and social well-being (e.g., Crystal Island, MathSpring, TLCTS,
Turtle Talk). Finally, perhaps the most important and prolific area of AI applied to digital learning games
has been that of using learning analytics, data mining, and statistics to analyze student behavior and
affect to help in better understanding student use of games and in redesigning the games (e.g., Battleship
Numberline, Beanstalk, Crystal Island, Physics Playground, Prime Climb, Refraction, Zombie Division,
Zoombinis).
AIED digital learning games have also demonstrated a considerable amount of success in a variety of
studies, uncovering various aspects of learning from games that were not previously known. For instance,
Decimal Point has been shown to be more effective and engaging in helping kids reinforce their
understanding of decimals than a comparable decimal tutoring system (McLaren et al., 2017). Decimal
Point has also been shown to be more effective in helping females learn (McLaren, Farzan et al., 2017).
AutoThinking (Hooshyar et al., 2021) and Zoombinis (Rowe et al., 2021), through well designed and
reasonably sized studies, have shown that computational thinking can be learned through game play.
Crystal Island, a narrative game that is perhaps the longest standing and most studied of any AIED
learning game, has shown in a variety of studies that students can learn microbiology from an NPC and a
narrative driven game (e.g., Lee et al., 2012; Sawyer et al., 2017). A variety of studies have shown that
students can “learn by teaching” an NPC, through interaction with Betty’s Brain (Biswas et al., 2016) and
Squares Family (Pareto, 2014; Sjödén et al., 2017). A classroom study of Zombie Division demonstrated
an important and previously unknown aspect of digital learning games: that integrating academic content
and game play is more effective for learning than separating the two (Habgood & Ainsworth, 2011).
A critical realization of the AIED digital learning game community has been the need for AIED
researchers, who are predominantly learning scientists and educational technologists, to collaborate with
game designers to be successful. The development of games with AI is inherently a multi-disciplinary
undertaking; it requires not only the usual experts in learning science, educational technology and
human-computer interaction, but also those versed in the intricacies of game mechanics and game
design. An indication of this movement was the convening of a CHI 2018 workshop, “CHI 2018

27

Workshop: Data-Driven Educational Game Design” (McLaren et al., 2018), in which game designers,
learning scientists and educational data miners met to discuss the various disciplines and issues that
need to be addressed in order to create AIED digital learning games. More such workshops and events,
with participation across a variety of disciplines, will benefit the further development of AIED learning
games.

5. Future Directions
While there has been much work done in the area AIED digital learning games, also with much
success, as outlined in the prior section, there are also several areas of potential work with digital learning
games that have been under-explored.
For instance, AI could play a more prominent role in providing more realistic and compelling nonplayer characters and/or pedagogical agents within digital learning games. While games such as Crystal
Island (Lester et al., 2013; Sawyer et al., 2017), MathSpring (Arroyo et al., 2014; 2013), and TLCTS
(Johnson, 2010) have shown that even relatively primitive AI-infused non-player characters can make a
significant difference to learning, there have been more recent developments in man-machine
communication that could lead to an even greater impact. For instance, the emergence of relatively
sophisticated virtual assistants such as Alexa (Lopatovska et al., 2019) has demonstrated the possibilities
of more natural and effective communication between humans and technology. AI, and in particular
natural language processing (NLP), could have a much bigger and direct impact on students’ learning
experience when incorporated into pedagogical agents that accompany the student, either as learning
companions or competitors (see, for instance, the chapter by Rus et al. in this handbook). There is ample
opportunity to apply state-of-the-art methods in NLP (e.g., Crossley et al., 2017; Howard & Ruder, 2018;
Ruseti et al., 2018; Young et al., 2018) to this area. Of course, a challenge with many of the natural
language machine learning techniques is their need for a large amount of in-domain training data, often
thousands or more examples. This requirement is difficult for many AIED digital learning games, which
have typically been tested in traditional randomized controlled experiments in labs or classrooms with, at
most, a few hundred students (with a couple notable exceptions: Battleship Numberline (Lomas et al.,
2013) and Refraction (O’Rourke, Bellweber, et al., 2014), both of which managed to reach more than
50,000 players through Internet presence). Yet, with the pandemic of 2020-2022 and the sudden and
significant move to online learning more AIED games may be positioned to reach much larger, out-ofschool audiences. Working with organizations like Brainpop.com is perhaps a wise move for more AIED
game researchers.
Equity and inclusiveness have rarely been considered in digital learning games (Buffum et al., 2016).
Most prior work with AIED learning games – and in fact in AI instructional systems more generally – has
treated student populations as though all individual learners are the same, or very similar. However, it is
likely that different sub-populations learn and play in different ways. For instance, Ogan and colleagues
(2015) found that the help seeking behavior of students using intelligent tutors can vary considerably
across different cultures; they specifically found differences between Costa Rican students and students
from the United States and the Philippines. In digital learning game research more specifically, McLaren
and colleagues have consistently found that female students learn better than males with Decimal Point
(Hou et al., 2020; McLaren, Farzan et al., 2017). Likewise, Arroyo and colleagues found that MathSpring
improved mathematics learning, engagement and other affective outcomes for both female and low
achieving students (Arroyo et al., 2013; 2014). As another example, the collaborative game Engage was
explicitly designed to support females and students with less prior game experience in learning computing
science (Buffum et al., 2016). A couple of the games reviewed in this chapter have reached to underserved populations, e.g., people with disabilities (ECHOES – Bernardini et al., 2014; Downtown: A
Subway Adventure – Cano et al., 2016; 2018). Identifying and reacting to these learner differences is an

28

important step towards more equity, better personalization, and, presumably, the increased effectiveness
of games. AI could certainly play a role in better adapting games for these different and diverse
populations. On the other hand, just as with AI research more generally, designers of AIED digital
learning games must be extremely careful to avoid AI bias (Manyika et al., 2019; Prates et al., 2019). On
this issue, the AIED community should engage with the larger AI community, following breakthroughs that
might occur in machine learning algorithms and approaches, to help in eradicating AI bias in AIED digital
learning games (and other AIED systems).
Another way that digital learning games could better employ AI is in the use of more sophisticated
student models and adaptation approaches, for instance, to track enjoyment in addition to domain
understanding and skills. While various adaptive algorithms have been used to modify gameplay to
support increasing difficulty and help students reach mastery (Arroyo et al., 2013; 2014; Conati et al.,
2013; Hooshyar et al., 2021), these algorithms have only been used in a relatively small number of
learning games and have almost exclusively focused on learning objectives and domain skills. However,
such models could also be used to modify gameplay to maximize fun and/or engagement for students, as
has been implemented using dynamic difficulty adjustment in digital game research (i.e., video game
research that is not focused on instruction – See e.g., Ang & Mitchell, 2019; Baldwin et al., 2016;
Frommel et al., 2018; Zohaib, 2018). There have been some steps in this direction, most notably, the
research with Decimal Point in which students self-reported their enjoyment in playing specific minigames within Decimal Point, a student model of that enjoyment was displayed to them on a dashboard
and was used by students to select further mini-games to play (Hou et al., 2020; 2021). While this
research is a step in the direction of an “enjoyment” or “engagement” student model, there are still a lot of
interesting and related research questions that may involve the support of AI. For instance, how do
students react to different representations of their enjoyment? Is enjoyment more about encouraging what
has already been enjoyed or seeking new and unknown opportunities?
An exciting new direction that a few AIED researchers have started to pursue, but is still in an
embryonic stage, is supporting tangible game-based learning. These types of games involve a synergy of
real-world physical play with computer-based instruction. For instance, Arroyo and colleagues (2017)
have developed a game environment for learning mathematics that involves the use of “wearable tutors”
in the form of smart phones and smart watches. The wearable devices act as mobile tutors, while
students are given real world tasks – e.g., a scavenger hunt where students search for physical objects –
and provide input to the devices on what they have done, while the tutors provide hints to help them in the
physical environment. Students manipulate, measure, estimate, and find mathematical objects that satisfy
certain constraints to help in playing the games. Another example is Yannier et al. (2016; 2020; 2021)
who added the manipulation of physical objects, such as blocks and towers, to an AI-based mixed reality
game to help 4-to-8-year-old children learn basic physics (see Figure 10).

29

Figure 10: Students playing with the Intelligent Science Station (norilla.org). (Figure provided by Nesra Yannier and
Trinity Area School District, reproduced by permission)

A specialized AI computer vision algorithm is used to track what children do in the physical
environment and then to provide personalized feedback in the form of an on-screen character (Yannier et
al., 2020; 2022). They were able to show that adding the physical objects to the game – in essence,
bridging the physical and virtual worlds in a mixed-reality setting – can lead to more learning compared to an
equivalent solely screen-based game . There are a number of exciting questions that AIED could tackle in
this space, such as: How can actions taken in the physical world be input to adaptive AI algorithms that
provide pedagogical advice on what to do in the physical world? Can the physical objects themselves –
for instance, an item being searched for in a scavenger hunt – be imbued with AI to add to the “smarts”
and engagement of the games?
It should be noted that most of the games reviewed in this chapter are single player games, with just a
few exceptions (TALENT – Maragos, 2013; Prime Climb – Conati et al., 2013; Squares Family – Pareto,
2009; 2014; Physics Playground – Sun et al., 2020; 2022). Thus, there may be learning opportunities that
are being missed by not developing more collaborative AIED learning games. Working collaboratively
could help students help one another by bringing their strengths, weaknesses, knowledge, and
misconceptions to the game, thus complementing one another so that together group members can solve
the problem at hand and learn (Housh et al., 2021; see also the chapter Martinez-Maldonado et al. in this
volume). As previously mentioned, Buffum and colleagues (2016) explicitly designed for and found that
their collaborative game, Engage, better supported female and less experienced students in collaborative
play versus single player use of the game. Feedback from students in their study revealed potential
benefits to collaboration, such as how a partner in gameplay can be a “sounding board” for what to try
next or when one player is stuck in gameplay they can rely on their partner to take over. Perhaps AI could
be supportive in such circumstances by having an AI agent that explicitly prompts the collaborating
students to help one another in these, and other ways. As with Squares Family (Pareto, 2009) and AI
programs in general, such as AI chess playing programs (Warwick, 2017), having students alternately
play with or against an AI or a human might provide instructional opportunities not otherwise possible. For

30

instance, the concept of learning by teaching (Biswas et al., 2005; Brophy et al., 1999; Palthepu et al.,
1991) could be exercised in such collaborative gameplay circumstances, prompting students to teach
both human and AI confederates in a game context.
Finally, the ultimate goal of research on AIED digital learning games should be to transfer more of the
evidence-based learning games to the real-world. In this way, we not only study AI in learning games at
schools and with students, but also provide those schools and students with substantial, on-going use of
games that have been proven in rigorous empirical tests. Leading the way – and potentially providing a
blueprint for others to follow – are games such as Zoombinis and TLCTS. TERC has sold almost 40,000
copies of the non-web version of Zoombinis and last year sold approximately 13,000 new licenses to the
Internet version of the game4. Lewis Johnson has spun off a company, Alelo, that sells an updated
version of TLTS to the U.S. military5. Hundreds of thousands of trainees have used Alelo’s cultural games
and tools to get cultural training. The military has required this training for people deployed in over 80
countries. While there are these glimmers of success in the real-world, there need to be more efforts
made to transfer thoroughly tested learning games to real and wide-spread use in education and training
contexts. To learn more about real-world transfer and commercialization of AI-based learning technology
see chapters by Ritter and Koedinger, Luckin and Cukurova in this volume.
In conclusion, while there has already been a lot of impressive research done with AIED digital
learning games, the future is bright with exciting new directions before us. By creating multi-disciplinary
teams of learning scientists, educational technologists, game designers, and AI experts, we foresee a
future in which AIED digital learning games will become an ever increasing and important component of
education.

Acknowledgements
This work has been influenced by conversations and collaborations with many of our colleagues
including Ryan Baker, Rosta Farzan, Jodi Forlizzi, Jessica Hammer, Richard Mayer, Michael Mogessie,
Eleanor O’Rourke, and Liz Richey.

References
Adams, D.M., Mayer, R.E., MacNamara, A., Koenig, A., & Wainess, R. (2012). Narrative games for
learning: Testing the discovery and narrative hypotheses. Journal of Educational Psychology, 104(1),
235-249. https://psycnet.apa.org/doi/10.1037/a0025595.
Aleven, V., Dow, S., Christel, M., et al. (2013). Supporting social-emotional development in collaborative
inquiry games for K-3 science learning. In: Proceedings of Games+Learning+Society Conference (GLS
9.0), ETC Press, 53–60.
Alonso-Fernandez, C., Martínez-Ortiz, I., Caballero, R., Freire, M., & Fernández-Manjón, B. (2019).
Predicting students' knowledge after playing a serious game based on learning analytics data: A case
study. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning 2019;1–9. doi: 10.1111/jcal.12405

4
5

From personal correspondence with Elizabeth Rowe of TERC.
From personal correspondence with Lewis Johnson of Alelo.

31

Ang, D. & Mitchell, A. (2019). Representation and frequency of player choice in player-oriented dynamic
difficulty adjustment systems. In Proceedings of the Annual Symposium on Computer-Human Interaction
in Play - CHI PLAY ’19, 589–600. https://doi.org/10.1145/3311350.3347165.
Arroyo, I., Burleson, W., Tai, M., Muldner, K., & Woolf, B. P. (2013). Gender differences in the use and
benefit of advanced learning technologies for mathematics. Journal of Educational Psychology, 105(4),
957-969. https://psycnet.apa.org/doi/10.1037/a0032748.
Arroyo, I., Woolf, B. P., Burleson, W., Muldner, K., Rai, D., & Tai, M. (2014). A multimedia adaptive
tutoring system for mathematics that addresses cognition, metacognition and affect. International Journal
of Artificial Intelligence in Education, 24(4), 387-426. https://doi.org/10.1007/s40593-014-0023-y.
Arroyo, I., Micciollo, M., Casano, J., Ottmar, E., Hulse, T., & Rodrigo, M. (2017). Wearable Learning:
Multiplayer Embodied Games for Math. Proceedings of the ACM SIGCHI Annual Symposium on
Computer-Human Interaction in Play (CHI PLAY 2017). Amsterdam, Netherlands.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3116595.3116637.
Baker, R.S.J.d., D'Mello, S.K., Rodrigo, M.M.T., & Graesser, A.C. (2010). Better to Be Frustrated than
Bored: The Incidence, Persistence, and Impact of Learners' Cognitive-Affective States during Interactions
with Three Different Computer-Based Learning Environments. International Journal of Human-Computer
Studies, 68 (4), 223-241. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhcs.2009.12.003.
Baker R.S.J.D., Habgood M.P.J., Ainsworth S.E., Corbett A.T. (2007). Modeling the acquisition of fluent
skill in educational action games. In: Conati C., McCoy K., Paliouras G. (eds) User Modeling 2007 (UM
2007). Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol 4511. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-73078-1_5.
Baldwin, A., Johnson, D. & Wyeth, P. (2016). Crowd-Pleaser: Player perspectives of multiplayer dynamic
difficulty adjustment in video games. In Proceedings of the 2016 Annual Symposium on ComputerHuman Interaction in Play - CHI PLAY ’16, 326–337. https://doi.org/10.1145/2967934.2968100.
Banawan, M.P., Rodrigo, M.M.T. & Andres, J.M.L. (2017). Predicting student carefulness within an
educational game for physics using Support Vector Machines. In: Proceedings of the 25th International
Conference on Computers in Education (ICCE 2017).
Bargh, J., & Schul, Y. (1980). On the cognitive benefits of teaching. Journal of Educational Psychology.
72(5), 593–604. https://psycnet.apa.org/doi/10.1037/0022-0663.72.5.593.
Bediou, B., Adams, D. M., Mayer, R. E., Tipton, E., Green, C. S., & Bavelier, D. (2018). Meta-analysis of
action video game impact on perceptual, attentional, and cognitive skills. Psychological Bulletin, 144(1),
77–110. https://psycnet.apa.org/doi/10.1037/bul0000130
Benton, L., Mavrikis, M., Vasalou, M., Joye, N., Sumner, E., Herbert, E., Revesz, A., Symvonis, A. &
Raftopoulou, C. (2021). Designing for “challenge” in a large-scale adaptive literacy game for primary
school children. British Journal of Educational Technology. 52, 5: 1862-1880. Wiley.
https://doi.org/10.1111/bjet.13146.

32

Bernardini, S., Porayska-Pomsta, K., & Smith, T. J. (2014). ECHOES: An intelligent serious game for
fostering social communication in children with autism. Information Sciences, 264, 41-60.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ins.2013.10.027.
Biswas, G., Jeong, H., Kinnebrew, J. S., Sulcer, B., & Roscoe, R. O. D. (2010). Measuring self-regulated
learning skills through social interactions in a teachable agent environment. Research and Practice in
Technology Enhanced Learning, 5(02), 123-152. http://dx.doi.org/10.1142/S1793206810000839.
Biswas, G., Leelawong, K., Belynne, K., & Adebiyi, B. (2005). Case studies in learning by teaching
behavioral differences in directed versus guided learning. In: Proceedings of the 27th Annual Conference
of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 828-833).
Biswas, G., Segedy, J.R., & Bunchongchit, K. (2016). From design to implementation to practice – A
learning by teaching system: Betty’s Brain. International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education,
26(1), 350-364. https://doi.org/10.1007/s40593-015-0057-9.
Bosch, N., D’Mello, S., Baker, R., Ocumpaugh, J., & Shute, V. (2016). Using video to automatically detect
learner affect in computer-enabled classrooms. ACM Transactions on Interactive Intelligent Systems,
6(2), 17.11-17.31. https://doi.org/10.1145/2946837.
Brophy, S., Biswas, G., Katzlberger, T., Bransford, J., & Schwartz, D. (1999). Teachable agents:
Combining insights from learning theory and computer science. In S. P. Lajoie & M. Vivet (Eds.),
Proceedings of Artificial Intelligence in Education (pp. 21–28). Amsterdam: IOS Press.
Buffum, P. S., Frankosky, M., Boyer, K. E., Wiebe, E. N., Mott, B. W., & Lester, J. C. (2016). Collaboration
and gender equity in game-based learning for middle school computer science. Computing in Science &
Engineering, 18(2), 18-28. https://doi.org/10.1109/MCSE.2016.37.
Bull, S. (2020). There are open learner models about!. IEEE Transactions on Learning Technologies,
13(2), 425-448. https://doi.org/10.1109/TLT.2020.2978473.
Bull, S. & Kay, J. (2008). Metacognition and open learner models. In: The 3rd workshop on metacognition and self-regulated learning in educational technologies, at ITS2008. pp. 7–20 (2008).
Cano, A.R., Fernández-Manjón, B., & García-Tejedor, Á.J. (2016). Downtown, a subway adventure: using
learning analytics to improve the development of a learning game for people with intellectual disabilities.
In 2016 IEEE 16th International Conference on Advanced Learning Technologies (ICALT) (pp. 125-129).
IEEE. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICALT.2016.46.
Cano, A.R., Fernández-Manjón, B., & García-Tejedor, Á.J. (2018). Using game learning analytics for
validating the design of a learning game for adults with intellectual disabilities. British Journal of
Educational Technology, 49(4), 659-672. https://doi.org/10.1111/bjet.12632.
Card, S. K., Moran, T. P., & Newell, A. (1983). The psychology of human-computer interaction. Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates, Hillsdale, NJ.
Castell, S. D., & Jenson, J. (2003). Serious play: Curriculum for a post-talk era. Journal of the
Canadian Association for Curriculum Studies, 1(1).

33

Chase, C., Chin, D.B., Oppezzo, M, & Schwartz, D.L. (2009). Teachable agents and the protégé effect:
Increasing the effort towards learning. Journal of Science Education and Technology, 18(4), 334-352. doi:
10.1007/s10956-009-9180-4.
Chi, M. T., Bassok, M., Lewis, M. W., Reimann, P., & Glaser, R. (1989). Self-explanations: How students
study and use examples in learning to solve problems. Cognitive science, 13(2), 145-182.
https://doi.org/10.1207/s15516709cog1302_1.
Chi, M. T., De Leeuw, N., Chiu, M. H., & LaVancher, C. (1994). Eliciting self-explanations improves
understanding. Cognitive Science, 18(3), 439-477. https://doi.org/10.1207/s15516709cog1803_3.
Clark, D. B., Tanner-Smith, E., & Killingsworth, S. (2016). Digital games, design, and learning: A
systematic review and meta-analysis. Review of Educational Research, 86(1), 79-122. doi:
10.3102/0034654315582065.
Collins, A., Brown, J. S., & Newman, S. E. (1989). Cognitive apprenticeship: Teaching the crafts of
reading, writing, and mathematics. In L. B. Resnick (Ed.), Knowing, learning, and instruction: Essays in
honor of Robert Glaser (pp. 453–494). Hillsdale: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Conati, C. & Gutica, M. (2016). Interaction with an edu-game: A detailed analysis of student emotions and
judges’ perceptions. International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education, 26, 975-1010. doi:
10.1007/s40593-015-0081-9
Conati, C., Jaques, N. & Muir, M. (2013). Understanding attention to adaptive hints in educational games:
An eye-tracking study. International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education, 23: 131-161. doi:
10.1007/s40593-013-0002-8.
Conati, C. & Zhou, X. (2002). Modeling students’ emotions from cognitive appraisal in educational games.
In: Proceedings of the International Conference on Intelligent Tutoring Systems (ITS 2002). 944-954. .
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/3-540-47987-2_94.
Corbett, A. T. & Anderson, J. R. (1995). Knowledge tracing: Modeling the acquisition of procedural
knowledge. User Modeling and User-Adapted Interaction. 4 (4): 253–278.
https://psycnet.apa.org/record/1996-29060-001.
Crocco, F., Offenholley, K., & Hernandez, C. (2016). A proof-of-concept study of game-based learning in
higher education. Simulation & Gaming, 47(4), 403-22. https://doi.org/10.1177%2F1046878116632484.
Crossley, S., Liu, R., & McNamara, D. (2017). Predicting math performance using natural language
processing tools. In Proceedings of the Seventh International Learning Analytics & Knowledge
Conference (pp. 339-347). ACM. https://doi.org/10.1145/3027385.3027399.
Czikszentmihalyi, M. (1975). Beyond boredom and anxiety, San Francisco: Jossey Bass.
Czikszentmihalyi, M. (1990). Flow: The psychology of optimal experience. New York: Harper & Row.
D’Mello, S. (2013). A selective meta-analysis on the relative incidence of discrete affective states during
learning with technology. Journal of Educational Psychology, 105(4), 1082-1099.
https://psycnet.apa.org/doi/10.1037/a0032674.

34

Dean, T., & Kanazawa, K. (1989). A model for reasoning about persistence and causation. Computational
Intelligence 5(3): 142–150. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-8640.1989.tb00324.x.
Deterding, S., Dixon, D., Khaled, R., & Nacke, L. (2011). From game design elements to gamefulness:
defining "gamification". In Proceedings of the 15th international academic MindTrek conference:
Envisioning future media environments, Tampere, Finland (pp. 9-15). ACM.
https://doi.org/10.1145/2181037.2181040.
Dias, J. & Paiva, A. (2005). Feeling and reasoning: A computational model for emotional characters. In:
the Proceedings of the Portuguese conference on Artificial Intelligence (pp. 127-140). Springer, Berlin,
Heidelberg. https://doi.org/10.1007/11595014_13.
Dweck, C.S. (2006). Mindset: The new psychology of success. New York: Random House.
Easterday, M.W., Aleven, V., Scheines, R. & Carver, S.M. (2017). Using tutors to improve educational
games: A cognitive game for policy argument, Journal of the Learning Sciences, 26:2, 226-276, doi:
10.1080/10508406.2016.126928.
Eggen, T. J., & Verschoor, A. J. (2006). Optimal testing with easy or difficult items in computerized
adaptive testing. Applied Psychological Measurement, 30(5), 379-393.
https://psycnet.apa.org/doi/10.1177/0146621606288890.
Elo A. (1978).The rating of chess players, past and present. New York: Arco Publishers.
Embretson, S.E. & Reise, S.P. (2000). Item Response Theory for psychologists. Psychology Press. ISBN
9780805828191.
Fraser, N. et al. (2013). Blockly: A visual programming editor. URL: https://blockly-games.appspot.com.
Frommel, J., Fischbach, F., Rogers, K. & Weber, M. (2018). Emotion-based dynamic difficulty adjustment
using parameterized difficulty and self-reports of emotion. In the Proceedings of the Annual Symposium
on Computer-Human Interaction in Play Extended Abstracts - CHI PLAY ’18, 163–171.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3242671.3242682.
Geden, M., Emerson, A., Carpenter, D., Rowe, J., Azevedo, R., & Lester, J. (2021). Predictive student
modeling in game-based learning environments with word embedding representations of reflection.
International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education, 31(1), 1-23. https://doi.org/10.1007/s40593020-00220-4.
Gee, J. P. (2003). What video games have to teach us about learning and literacy. New York:
Palgrave/Macmillian.
Gee, J. P. (2007). Good video games and good learning Collected essays on video games, learning and
literacy, 2nd Edition. Peter Lang International Academic Publishers. doi: https://doi.org/10.3726/978-14539-1162-4.
Gilbert, N. (2021). Number of gamers worldwide 2021/2022: Demographics, statistics, and predictions.
FinancesOnline-Reviews for Business. https://financesonline.com/number-of-gamers-worldwide/

35

Graesser, A. C., D'Mello, S. K., & Strain, A. C. (2014). Emotions in advanced learning technologies. In R.
Pekrun & L. Linnenbrink-Garcia (Eds.), Educational psychology handbook series. International handbook
of emotions in education (p. 473–493). Routledge/Taylor & Francis Group.
Gros, B. (2007). Digital games in education: The design of games-based learning environments. Journal
of Research on Technology in Education, 40, 1-23.
Ha, E. Y., Rowe, J. P., Mott, B. W., & Lester, J. C. (2011). Goal recognition with Markov Logic Networks
for player-adaptive games. In: Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Artificial
Intelligence and Interactive Digital Entertainment, 32–39. Menlo Park, CA: AAAI Press.
Habgood, M. P. J., & Ainsworth, S. (2011). Motivating children to learn effectively: Exploring the value of
intrinsic integration in educational games. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 20(2), 169–206.
doi:10.1080/10508406.2010.50802.
Hancock, C. & Osterweil, S. (1996). Zoombinis and the art of mathematical play. Hands On! 19, 1 (Spring
1996), pp. 17–19.
Harpstead, E. & Aleven, V. (2015). Using empirical learning curve analysis to inform design in an
educational game. In: Proceedings of CHI Play 2015. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2793107.2793128 .
Harpstead, E., Richey, J.E., Nguyen, H., & McLaren, B.M. (2019). Exploring the subtleties of agency and
indirect control in digital learning games. In: Proceedings of the 9th International Conference on Learning
Analytics & Knowledge (LAK'19). (pp. 121-129). ACM. doi: https://doi.org/10.1145/3303772.3303797.
Henderson, N., Min, W., Rowe, J., & Lester, J. (2020a). Enhancing affect detection in game-based
learning environments with multimodal conditional generative modeling. In: Proceedings of the 2020
International Conference on Multimodal Interaction (pp. 134-143).
Henderson, N., Min, W., Rowe, J., & Lester, J. (2020b). Multimodal player affect modeling with auxiliary
classifier generative adversarial networks. In: Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial
Intelligence and Interactive Digital Entertainment (Vol. 16, No. 1, pp. 224-230).
Heyman, G.D., & Dweck, C.S. (1998). Children’s thinking about traits: Implications for judgments of the
self and others. Child Development 64, 2, 391–403.
Hocine, N. (2019). Personalized serious games for self-regulated attention training. In: Proceedings of the
27th Conference on User Modeling, Adaptation and Personalization (UMAP ‘19).
https://doi.org/10.1145/3314183.3323458.
Hocine, N., Ameur, M. & Ziani, W. (2019). Keep Attention: A personalized serious game for attention
training. In: Proceedings of the 3rd International Symposium on Gamification and Games for Learning
(GamiLearn ‘19).
Homer, B.D., Hayward, E.O., Frye, J., & Plass, J.L. (2012). Gender and player characteristics in video
game play of preadolescents. Computers in Human Behavior, 25(5), 1782-1789.

36

Honey, M. A. & Hilton, M. L. (2011). Learning science through computer games and simulations. The
National Academies Press. (http://www.nap.edu/openbook.php?record_id=13078&page=R1).
Hooshyar, D., Malva, L., Yang, Y., Pedaste, M., Wang, M., & Lim, H. (2021). An adaptive educational
computer game: Effects on students’ knowledge and learning attitude in computational thinking.
Computers in Human Behavior, 114.
Hou, X., Nguyen, H.A., Richey, J.E., & McLaren, B.M. (2020). Exploring how gender and enjoyment
impact learning in a digital learning game. In: I. Bittencourt, M. Cukurova, K. Muldner, R. Luckin, & E.
Millán (Eds.) Proceedings of the 21st International Conference on Artificial Intelligence in Education. AIED
2020. Lecture Notes in Computer Science (LNCS, Vol. 12163). Springer, Cham.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-52237-7_21.
Hou, X., Nguyen, H. A., Richey, J. E., Harpstead, E., Hammer, J., & McLaren, B. M. (2021). Assessing
the effects of open models of learning and enjoyment in a digital learning game. International Journal of
Artificial Intelligence in Education, 1-31. https://doi.org/10.1007/s40593-021-00250-6.
Housh, K., Saleh, A., Phillips, T., Hmelo-Silver, C.E., Glazewski, K., Lee, S., Mott, B., & Lester, J. (2021).
Designing for equitable participation in collaborative game-based learning environments. In: Proceedings
of the International Conference of the Learning Sciences (ICLS 2021).
Howard, J., & Ruder, S. (2018). Universal language model fine-tuning for text classification. In:
Proceedings of the 56th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long
Papers) (Vol. 1, pp. 328-339).
Jackson, G. T., Guess, R. H., & McNamara, D. S. (2010). Assessing cognitively complex strategy use in
an untrained domain. Topics in Cognitive Science, 2(1), 127-137. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.17568765.2009.01068.x.
Jackson, G. T. & McNamara, D.S. (2011). Motivational impacts of a game-based intelligent tutoring
system. In: Proceedings of the Twenty-Fourth International Florida Artificial Intelligence Research Society
Conference.
Jacovina, M. E., Jackson, G. T., Snow, E. L., & McNamara, D. S. (2016). Timing game-based practice in
a reading comprehension strategy tutor. In: Proceedings of the International Conference on Intelligent
Tutoring Systems (pp. 59-68). Springer, Cham.
Johnson, W. L. (2010). Serious use of a serious game for language learning. International Journal of
Artificial Intelligence in Education 20(2): 175–195.
Johnson, W.L. & Lester, J. (2018). Pedagogical agents: Back to the future. AI Magazine 39. Doi:
https://doi.org/10.1609/aimag.v39i2.2793
Jung, H., Kim, H.J. So, S., Kim, J. & Oh, C. (2019) TurtleTalk: An educational programming game for
children with voice user interface. In: CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems
Extended Abstracts (CHI’19 Extended Abstracts), May 4–9, 2019, Glasgow, Scotland U.K. ACM, New
York, NY, USA, 6 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3290607.3312773.

37

Juraschka, R. (2019, September 29). How digital game-based learning improves student success.
Prodigy Math Blog. https://www.prodigygame.com/main-en/blog/digital-game-based-learning/.
Kaczmarek, S. & Petroviča, S. (2018). Promotion of learning motivation through individualization of
learner-game interaction. In: Proceedings of the 2018 IEEE Conference on Computational Intelligence
and Games (CIG 2018). doi: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/8490371.
Kaufman, G. & Flanagan, M. (2015). A psychologically “embedded” approach to designing games for
prosocial causes. Cyberpsychology: Journal of Psychosocial Research on Cyberspace, 9(3). doi:
https://doi.org/10.5817/CP2015-3-5
Ke, F. (2016). Designing and integrating purposeful learning in game play: A systematic review.
Educational Technology Research and Development, 64(2), 219-44. https://eric.ed.gov/?id=EJ1094502.
Ke, F., Shute, V., Clark, K.M., & Erlebacher, G. (2019). Interdisciplinary design of game-based learning
platforms: A phenomenological examination of the integrative design of game, learning, and assessment.
Springer. ISBN 978-3-030-04339-1.
Kinnebrew, J. S. & Biswas, G. (2012). Identifying Learning Behaviors by Contextualizing Differential
Sequence Mining with Action Features and Performance Evolution. International Educational Data Mining
Society. https://eric.ed.gov/?id=ED537192.
Kinnebrew, J.S., Loretz, K. M., & Biswas, G. (2013). A contextualized, differential sequence mining
method to derive students' learning behavior patterns. Journal of Educational Data Mining, 5(1), 190-219.
https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.3554617.
Kinnebrew, J. S., Segedy, J.R., & Biswas, G. (2014). Analyzing the temporal evolution of students’
behaviors in open-ended learning environments. Metacognition and learning, 9(2), 187-215.
Kinnebrew, J.S., Segedy, J.R. & Biswas, G. (2017). Integrating model-driven and data-driven techniques
for analyzing learning behaviors in open-ended learning environments. IEEE Transactions on Learning
Technologies, 10(2), 140-153. https://eric.ed.gov/?id=EJ1146025.
Klinkenberg, S., Straatemeier, M., & van der Maas, H.L.J. (2011). Computer adaptive practice of Maths
ability using a new item response model for on-the-fly ability and difficulty assessment. Computers &
Education 57, 1813-1824. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compedu.2011.02.003.
Landers, R., Armstrong, M., & Collmus, A. (2017). How to use game elements to enhance learning:
Applications of the theory of gamified learning. Serious games and edutainment applications, 457-483.
doi:10.1177/1046878114563660.
Landers, R. & Landers, A. (2014). An empirical test of the theory of gamified learning: The effect of
leaderboards on time-on-task and academic performance. Simulation & Gaming. 45(6): p. 769-785.
https://doi.org/10.1177/1046878114563662.
Lee, S.Y., Mott, B.W., & Lester, J.C. (2011). Modeling narrative-centered tutorial decision making in
guided discovery learning. In: Proceedings of the Fifteenth International Conference on Artificial
Intelligence and Education, 163–170. Berlin: Springer.

38

Lee, S. Y., Mott, B. W., & Lester, J. C. (2012). Real-time narrative-centered tutorial planning for storybased learning. In Proceedings of the Eleventh International Conference on Intelligent Tutoring Systems,
476–481. Berlin: Springer. https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1007/978-3-642-30950-2_61.
Leelawong, K., & Biswas, G. (2008). Designing learning by teaching agents: The Betty's Brain system.
International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education, 18(3), 181-208.
https://psycnet.apa.org/record/2008-15202-002.
Lester, J. C., Ha, E. Y., Lee, S. Y., Mott, B. W., Rowe, J. P., & Sabourin, J. L. (2013). Serious games get
smart: Intelligent game-based learning environments. AI Magazine, 34(4), 31-45.
https://doi.org/10.1609/aimag.v34i4.2488.
Lester, J.C., Spires, H.A., Nietfeld, J.L., Minogue, J., Mott, B.W., & Lobene, E.V. (2014). Designing gamebased learning environments for elementary science education: A narrative-centered learning
perspective. Information Sciences 264, 4-18. https://dl.acm.org/doi/abs/10.1016/j.ins.2013.09.005.
Lewis, J. R. (1995). IBM computer usability satisfaction questionnaires: Psychometric evaluation and
instructions for use. International Journal of Human-Computer Interaction, 7(1), 57-78.
https://doi.org/10.1080/10447319509526110.
Lindberg, R. S. & Laine, T. H. (2016). Detecting play and learning styles for adaptive educational games.
In: Proceedings of the International Conference on Computer Supported Education (CSEDU 2016). (pp.
181-189).
Lindberg, R. S., Hasanov, A., & Laine, T. H. (2017). Improving Play and Learning Style Adaptation in a
Programming Education Game. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Computer Supported
Education (CSEDU 2017). (pp. 450-457).
Lindberg, R. S., & Laine, T. H. (2018). Formative evaluation of an adaptive game for engaging learners of
programming concepts in K-12. International Journal of Serious Games, 5(2), 3-24.
https://doi.org/10.17083/ijsg.v5i2.220.
Lobel, A., Engels, R.C.M.E., Stone, L.L., Burk, W.J., & Granic, I. (2017). Video gaming and children’s
psychosocial well-being: A longitudinal study. Journal of Youth and Adolescence, 46(4), 884–897. doi:
10.1007/s10964-017-0646-z.
Loderer, K., Pekrun, R., & Lester, J. C. (2018). Beyond cold technology: A systematic review and metaanalysis on emotions in technology-based learning environments. Learning and Instruction, 101162.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.learninstruc.2018.08.002.
Loderer, K., Pekrun, R., & Plass, J. (2019). Emotional foundations of game-based learning. In J.L. Plass,
R.E. Mayer, & B.D. Homer (Eds.), Handbook of game-based learning. (pp. 111-151). MIT Press.
Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Lomas, D., Ching, D., Stampfer, E., Sandoval, M., & Koedinger, K. (2011). Battleship Numberline: A
Digital Game for Improving Estimation Accuracy on Fraction Number Lines. Society for Research on
Educational Effectiveness. https://eric.ed.gov/?id=ED528880.

39

Lomas, D., Patel, K., Forlizzi, J.L., & Koedinger, K.R. (2013). Optimizing challenge in an educational
game using large-scale design experiments. In: Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems, pp. 89–98. ACM. https://doi.org/10.1145/2470654.2470668.
Lomas, D., Stamper, J., Muller, R., Patel, K., & Koedinger, K. R. (2012). The effects of adaptive
sequencing algorithms on player engagement within an online game. In: Proceedings of the International
Conference on Intelligent Tutoring Systems (pp. 588-590). Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg.
https://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.353.186&rep=rep1&type=pdf.
Long, Y. & Aleven, V. (2014). Gamification of joint student/system control over problem selection in a
linear equation tutor. In: S. Trausan-Matu, K. E. Boyer, M. Crosby, & K. Panourgia (Eds.), Proceedings of
the 12th International Conference on Intelligent Tutoring Systems (ITS 2014). (pp. 378-387). New York:
Springer. doi:10.1007/978-3-319-07221-0_47.
Long, Y. & Aleven, V. (2018). Educational game and intelligent tutoring system: A classroom
study and comparative design analysis. Proceedings of CHI 2018. doi:10.1145/3057889
Lopatovska, I., Rink, K., Knight, I., Raines, I., Cosenza, K., Williams, H., Sorsche, P., Hirsch, D., Li, Q., &
Martinez, A. (2019). Talk to me: Exploring user interactions with the Amazon Alexa. Journal of
Librarianship and Information Science, 51(4), https://doi.org/10.1177/0961000618759414.
Malone, T. W. (1981). Toward a theory of intrinsically motivating instruction. Cognitive Science, 5, 333369. doi: 10.1207/s15516709cog0504_2.
Manske, M., & Conati, C. (2005). Modelling Learning in an Educational Game. In Proceedings of the 12th
International Conference on Artificial Intelligence in Education, pp. 411-418.
Manyika, J., Silberg, J. & Presten, B. (2019). What do we do about the biases in AI? Harvard Business
Review. https://hbr.org/2019/10/what-do-we-do-about-the-biases-in-ai.
Maragos, K. (2013). Web-based adaptive educational games-Exploitation in computer science education.
The Committee of Research and Development, University of Athens, 81, 2013.
Martin, S.M., Casey, J.R., & Kane, S. (2021). Serious games in personalized learning: New models for
design and performance. Routledge. ISBN 9780367487508.
Martin, B., Koedinger, K.R., Mitrovic, A., & Mathan, S. (2005). On using learning curves to evaluate ITS.
In: Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on Artificial Intelligence in Education, AIED 2005.
419-426. ISBN 978-1-58603-530-3.
Mayer, R. E. (2014). Computer games for learning: An evidence-based approach. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press. ISBN: 9780262027571
Mayer, R. E. (2019). Computer games in education. Annual Review of Psychology. 70: 531–49.
https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-psych-010418-102744.
Mayer, R. E. & Johnson, C. I. (2010). Adding instructional features that promote learning in a game-like
environment. Journal of Educational Computing Research, 42(3), 241–265.
https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.2190/EC.42.3.a.

40

McLaren, B. M., Adams, D. M., Mayer, R. E., & Forlizzi, J. (2017). A computer-based game that promotes
mathematics learning more than a conventional approach. International Journal of Game-Based Learning
(IJGBL), 7(1), 36-56. https://doi.org/10.4018/IJGBL.2017010103.
McLaren, B. M., Asbell-Clarke, J. & Hammer, J. (2018). “CHI 2018 Workshop: Data-Driven Educational
Game Design” CHI 2018 Workshop at the CHI conference in Montreal, Quebec Canada.
McLaren, B.M., Farzan, R., Adams, D.M., Mayer, R.E., & Forlizzi, J. (2017). Uncovering gender and
problem difficulty effects in learning with an educational game. In: E. André, R. Baker, X. Hu, M.M.T.
Rodrigo, and B. du Boulay (Eds.). Proceedings of the 18th International Conference on Artificial
Intelligence in Education (AIED 2017). LNAI 10331 (pp. 540-543). Springer: Berlin.
McNamara, D. S., Graesser, A. C., McCarthy, P. M., & Cai, Z. (2014). Automated evaluation of text and
discourse with Coh-Metrix. Cambridge University Press. https://eric.ed.gov/?id=ED602400
McNamara, D. S., Jackson, G. T., & Graesser, A. C. (2010). Intelligent tutoring and games (ITaG). In: Y.
K. Baek (Ed.), Gaming for classroom-based learning: Digital role-playing as a motivator of study (pp. 44–
65). Hershey, PA: IGI Global.
Min, W., Mott, B., Rowe, J., Taylor, R., Wiebe, E., Boyer, K., & Lester, J. (2017). Multimodal goal
recognition in open-world digital games. In: Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence
and Interactive Digital Entertainment (Vol. 13, No. 1).
Mitrovic, A. (2012). Fifteen years of constraint-based tutors: what we have achieved and where we are
going. User Modeling and User-Adapted Interaction, 22(1-2), 39-72. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11257-0119105-9.
Mousavinasab, E., Zarifsanajey, N., Niakan Kalhori, S.R., Rakhshan, M., Keikha, L, & Ghazi Saeedi, M
(2021). Intelligent tutoring systems: A systematic review of characteristics, applications, and evaluation
methods. Interactive Learning Environments. https://doi.org/10.1080/10494820.2018.1558257.
Munshi, A., Rajendran, R., Ocumpaugh, J., Biswas, G., Baker, R. S., & Paquette, L. (2018). Modeling
learners’ cognitive and affective states to scaffold SRL in open ended learning environments. In:
Proceedings of the International Conference on User Modelling, Adaptation and Personalization (UMAP),
Singapore, pp. 131-138. https://doi.org/10.1145/3209219.3209241
Nguyen, H., Harpstead, E., Wang, Y. & McLaren, B.M. (2018). Student agency and game-based learning:
A study comparing low and high agency. In: C. Rosé, R. Martínez-Maldonado, H.U. Hoppe, R. Luckin, M.
Mavrikis, K. Porayska-Pomsta, B. McLaren and B. du Boulay (Eds.). Proceedings of the 19th International
Conference on Artificial Intelligence in Education (AIED 2018). LNAI 10947 (pp. 338-351). Springer:
Berlin.
Nguyen, H.A, Hou, X., Stamper, J., & McLaren, B.M. (2020). Moving beyond test scores: Analyzing the
effectiveness of a digital learning game through learning analytics. In: Proceedings of the 13th
International Conference on Educational Data Mining (EDM 2020), pp. 487–495.

41

Nguyen, H., Wang, Y., Stamper, J., & McLaren, B.M. (2019). Using knowledge component modeling to
increase domain understanding in a digital learning game. In: Proceedings of the 12th International
Conference on Educational Data Mining (EDM 2019). (pp. 139-148). https://eric.ed.gov/?id=ED599221.
The NPD Group (2019). Retail Tracking Service, 2019 Entertainment Survey. https://igda-website.s3.useast-2.amazonaws.com/wp-content/uploads/2019/10/16161928/NPD-2019-Evolution-of-EntertainmentWhitepaper.pdf
Ocumpaugh, J., Baker, R. S., Gaudino, S., Labrum, M. J., & Dezendorf, T. (2013). Field observations of
engagement in Reasoning Mind. In: Proceedings of the International Conference on Artificial Intelligence
in Education (pp. 624-627). Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg.
Ocumpaugh, J., Baker, R.S., Rodrigo, M.T.: Baker Rodrigo Ocumpaugh Monitoring Protocol (BROMP)
2.0 Technical and Training Manual. (2015).
Ogan, A., Walker, E., Baker, R., Rodrigo, M.M.T., Soriano, J.C. & Castro, M.J. (2015). Towards
understanding how to assess help-seeking behavior across cultures. International Journal of Artificial
Intelligence in Education, 25, 229-248. https://doi.org/10.1007/s40593-014-0034-8.
O’Rourke, E,. Ballweber, C., & Popović, Z. (2014). Hint systems may negatively impact performance in
educational games. Proceedings of the First Annual ACM Conference on Learning @ Scale (L@S '14).
(pp. 51-60). dos: https://doi.org/10.1145/2556325.2566248.
O'Rourke, E., Chen, Y., Haimovitz, K., Dweck, C.S., & Popović, Z. (2015). Demographic differences in a
growth mindset incentive structure for educational games. In: Proceedings of the Second Annual ACM
Conference on Learning at Scale Works in Progress (L@S WIP 2015).
O'Rourke, E., Haimovitz, K., Ballweber, C., Dweck, C.S., & Popović, Z. (2014). Brain points: A growth
mindset structure boosts persistence in an educational game. In: Proceedings of the ACM Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI 2014). https://doi.org/10.1145/2556288.2557157.
O’Rourke, E., Peach, E., Dweck, C.S., & Popović, Z. (2016). Brain points: A deeper look at a growth
mind-set incentive structure for an educational game. In: Proceedings of the ACM Conference on
Learning at Scale (L@S 2016). https://doi.org/10.1145/2876034.2876040.
Palthepu, S., Greer, J., & McCalla, G. (1991). Learning by teaching. In: Proceedings of the International
Conference on the Learning Sciences, AACE (pp. 357–363).
Pareto, L. (2009). Teachable agents that learn by observing game playing behaviour. In: Proceedings of
the Workshop on Intelligent Educational Games at the 14th International Conference on Artificial
Intelligence in Education (pp. 31-40).
Pareto, L. (2014). A teachable agent game engaging primary school children to learn arithmetic
concepts and reasoning. International Journal of AI in Education, 24, 251-283.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s40593-014-0018-8.
Parong, J., Mayer, R. E., Fiorella, L., MacNamara, A., Homer, B. D., & Plass, J. L. (2017). Learning
executive function skills by playing focused video games. Contemporary Educational Psychology, 51,
141-151. doi: 10.1016/j.cedpsych.2017.07.002.

42

Parong, J, Wells, A., & Mayer, R. E. (2020). Replicated evidence towards a cognitive theory of gamebased training. Journal of Educational Psychology, 112(5), 922-937. https://doi.org/10.1037/edu0000413.
Pashler H., McDaniel M., Rohrer D., & Bjork R. (2008). Learning styles: Concepts and evidence.
Psychological Science in the Public Interest. 2008;9(3):105-119. doi:10.1111/j.1539-6053.2009.01038.x
Peddycord-Liu, Z., Cody, C., Kessler, S., Barnes, J.T., & Lynch, C.F. (2017). Using serious game
analytics to inform digital curricular sequencing: What math objective should students play next? In: CHI
Play ‘17: Proceedings of the Annual Symposium on Computer-Human Interaction in Play. pp. 195–204.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3116595.3116620.
Peddycord-Liu, Z., Catete, V., Vandenberg, Barnes, J.T., Lynch, C., & Rutherford, T. (2019). A field study
of teachers using a curriculum-integrated digital game. In: Proceedings of CHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems (CHI '19), May 4–9, 2019, Glasgow, Scotland UK. ACM, New York, NY,
USA 12 Pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3290605.3300658.
Peirce, N., Conlan, O., & Wade, V. (2008). Adaptive educational games: Providing non-invasive
personalised learning experiences. In: Proceedings of the 2008 second IEEE international conference on
digital game and intelligent toy enhanced learning (pp. 28-35). IEEE.
Prates, M.O.R., Avelar, P.H.C., & Lamb, L. (2019). Assessing gender bias in machine translation -- A
case study with Google Translate. Computers and Society. doi: 10.1007/s00521-019-04144-6.
Prensky, M. (2006). Don't bother me, Mom, I'm learning! How computer and video games are preparing
your kids for 21st century success and how you can help. St. Paul: Paragon House.
Prensky, M. (2004). Digital game-based learning. McGraw-Hill. ISBN:0071454004;
ISBN13:9780071454001
Prizant, B. M., Wetherby, A. M., Rubin, E., & Laurent, A. C. (2003). The SCERTS model: A transactional,
family-centered approach to enhancing communication and socioemotional abilities of children with
autism spectrum disorder. Infants & Young Children, 16(4), 296-316.
Resnick, M., Maloney, J., Monroy-Hernández, A., Rusk, N., Eastmond, E., Brennan, K., Millner, A.,
Rosenbaum, E., Silver, J., Silverman, B. et al. (2009). Scratch: Programming for all. Communications of
the ACM 52, 11, 60–67. https://doi.org/10.1145/1592761.1592779.
Rollings, A. & Morris, D. (2000). Game architecture and design: Learn the best practices for game design
and programming. Coriolis. ISBN-13: 978-1576104255; ISBN-10: 1576104257.
Rowe, E., Asbell-Clarke, J., Bardar, E., Almeda, M.V., Baker, R.S., Scruggs, R., & Gasca, S. (2020).
Advancing research in game-based learning assessment: Tools and methods for measuring implicit
learning. In: Advancing Educational Research With Emerging Technology. doi: 10.4018/978-1-79981173-2.ch006.
Rowe, E., Almeda, M.V., Asbell-Clarke, J., Scruggs, R., Baker, R., Bardar, E., & Gasca, S. (2021).
Assessing implicit computational thinking in Zoombinis puzzle gameplay. Computers in Human Behavior,

43

120. Special Issue on “Towards Strengthening Links between Learning Analytics and Assessment:
Challenges and Potentials of a Promising New Bond.” https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2021.106707.
Rowe, J.P. & Lester, J.C. (2010). Modeling user knowledge with dynamic Bayesian Networks in
interactive narrative environments. In: Proceedings of the Sixth Annual Artificial Intelligence and
Interactive Digital Entertainment Conference, 57–62. Palo Alto, CA: AAAI Press.
Rowe, J.P., Shores, L.R., Mott, B.W., & Lester, J.C. (2011). Integrating learning, problem solving, and
engagement in narrative-centered learning environments. International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in
Education 21(2): 115–133. http://dx.doi.org/10.3233/JAI-2011-019.
Ruseti, S., Dascalu, M., Johnson, A.M., Balyan, R., Kopp, K.J., McNamara, D.S., Crossley, S.A., &
Trausan-Matu, S. (2018). Predicting question quality using recurrent neural networks. In: Proceedings of
the International Conference on Artificial Intelligence in Education (AIED 2018) (pp. 491-502). Springer,
Cham. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-93843-1_36.
Sabourin, J.L., Mott, B.W., & Lester, J.C. (2011). Modeling learner affect with theoretically
grounded dynamic Bayesian Networks. In: Proceedings of the Fourth International Conference on
Affective Computing and Intelligent Interaction, 286–295. Berlin: Springer. doi:10.1007/978-3-642-246005_32
Sabourin, J.L., Shores, L.R., Mott, B.W., & Lester, J.C. (2013). Understanding and predicting student selfregulated learning strategies in game-based learning environments. International Journal of Artificial
Intelligence in Education, 23: 94-114. doi 10.1007/s40593-013-0004-6. https://doi.org/10.1007/s40593013-0004-6.
Salen, K. & Zimmerman, E. (2003). Rules of play: Game design fundamentals. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press. ISBN: 9780262240451.
Sawyer, R., Smith, A., Rowe, J., Azevedo, R., & Lester, J. (2017). Is more agency better? The impact of
student agency on game-based learning. In: Andŕe, E., Baker, R., Hu, X., Rodrigo, M.M.T., du Boulay, B.
(eds.) Proceedings of the International Conference on AI in Education (AIED 2017). LNCS, vol. 10331,
pp.335–346. Springer, Cham. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-61425-0_28.
Schöbel, S., Saqr, M., & Janson, A. (2021). Two decades of game concepts in digital learning
environments–A bibliometric study and research agenda. Computers & Education, 173, 104296.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compedu.2021.104296.
Segedy, J. R., Biswas, G., Blackstock, E. F., & Jenkins, A. (2013a). Guided skill practice as an adaptive
scaffolding strategy in open-ended learning environments. In: Proceedings of the International
Conference on Artificial Intelligence in Education (pp. 532-541). Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-39112-5_54.
Segedy, J. R., Kinnebrew, J. S., & Biswas, G. (2013b). The effect of contextualized conversational
feedback in a complex open-ended learning environment. Educational Technology Research and
Development, 61(1), 71-89. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11423-012-9275-0.
Segedy, J.R., Biswas, G., & Sulcer, B. (2014). A model-based behavior analysis approach for openended environments. Journal of Educational Technology & Society, 17(1), 272-282.

44

Segedy, J.R., Kinnebrew, J.S., & Biswas, G. (2015). Using coherence analysis to characterize selfregulated learning behaviors in open-ended learning environments. Journal of Learning Analytics, 2(1),
13-48. https://doi.org/10.18608/jla.2015.21.3.
Self, J. (2016). The birth of IJAIED. International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education 26: 4-12. doi
10.1007/s40593-015-0040-5. https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s40593-015-0040-5.
Shute, V. J. (2011). Stealth assessment in computer-based games to support learning. Computer games
and Instruction 55, 2 (2011), 503-524.
Shute, V. J., D’Mello, S., Baker, R., Cho, K., Bosch, N., Ocumpaugh, J., Ventura, M. & Almeda, V. (2015).
Modeling how incoming knowledge, persistence, affective states, and in-game progress influence student
learning from an educational game. Computers & Education 86 (2015) 224-235.
https://psycnet.apa.org/doi/10.1016/j.compedu.2015.08.001.
Shute, V. J., Rahimi, S., & Smith, G. (2019). Chapter 4: Game-based learning analytics in physics
playground. In: A. Tlili and M. Chang (eds.), Data Analytics Approaches in Educational Games and
Gamification Systems, Smart Computing and Intelligence, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-32-9335-9_4.
Shute, V. J., Rahimi, S., Smith, G., Ke, F., Almond, R., Dai, C.-P., Kuba, R., Liu, Z., Yang, X. & Sun, C.
(2021). Maximizing learning without sacrificing the fun: Stealth assessment, adaptivity and learning
supports in educational games. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, 127-141.
https://doi.org/10.1111/jcal.12473.
Shute, V. J., & Ventura, M. (2013). Measuring and supporting learning in games: Stealth assessment.
Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Shute, V. J., Ventura, M., & Kim, Y. J. (2013). Assessment and learning of qualitative physics in Newton's
playground. The Journal of Educational Research, 106(6), 423-430.
https://doi.org/10.1080/00220671.2013.832970.
Sjödén, B., Lind, M., & Silvervarg, A. (2017). Can a teachable agent influence how students respond to
competition in an educational game? In: Proceedings of the 18th International Conference on Artificial
Intelligence in Education (AIED 2017). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-61425-0_29.
Spann, C. A., Shute, V. J., Rahimi, S., & D'Mello, S. K. (2019). The productive role of cognitive
reappraisal in regulating affect during game-based learning. Computers in Human Behavior, 100, 358–
369. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2019.03.002.
Squire, K. & Jenkins, H. (2003). Harnessing the power of games in education. Insight, 3(7), 5-33.
Sun, C., Shute, V. J., Stewart, A. E. B., Beck-White, Q., Reinhardt, C. R., Zhou, G., Duran, N., & D'Mello,
S. K. (2022). The relationship between collaborative problem solving behaviors and solution outcomes in
a game-based learning environment. Computers in Human Behavior, 128, [107120].
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2021.107120

45

Sun, C., Shute, V. J., Stewart, A., Yonehiro, J., Duran, N., & D'Mello, S. (2020). Towards a generalized
competency model of collaborative problem solving. Computers & Education, 143, [103672].
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compedu.2019.103672.
Taub, M., Sawyer, R., Smith, A., Rowe, J., Azevedo, R. & Lester, J. (2020). The agency effect: The
impact of student agency on learning, emotions, and problem-solving behaviors in a game-based learning
environment. Computers & Education 147, 1-19. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compedu.2019.103781.
Tahir, F., Mitrovic, A., & Sotardi, V. (2020) Investigating the Effects of Gamifying SQL-Tutor. In: So, H.J.
et al. (Eds.) Proceedings of the 28th International Conference on Computers in Education, pp. 416-425.
Asia-Pacific Society for Computers in Education. ISBN978-986-97214-5-5.
Tobias, S. & Fletcher, J. D. (2011). Computer games and instruction. Charlotte NC: Information Age.
https://eric.ed.gov/?id=ED529495.
Tokac, U., Novak, E., & Thompson, C. G. (2019). Effects of game-based learning on students'
mathematics achievement: A meta-analysis. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, 35(3), 407-420.
https://doi.org/10.1111/jcal.12347.
VanLehn, K. (2006). The behavior of tutoring systems. International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in
Education, 16(3), 227-265. https://psycnet.apa.org/record/2007-08276-002.
VanLehn, K. (2011). The relative effectiveness of human tutoring, intelligent tutoring systems, and other
tutoring systems. Educational psychologist, 46(4), 197-221.
https://doi.org/10.1080/00461520.2011.611369.
Vygotsky, L.S. (1978). In: M. Cole, V. John-Steiner, S. Scribner and E. Souberman, (Eds.), Mind in
society: The development of higher psychological processes. Cambridge: Harvard University Press. ISBN
9780674576292
Waalkens, M., Aleven, V., & Taatgen, N. 2013. Does supporting multiple student strategies lead to
greater learning and motivation? Investigating a source of complexity in the architecture of intelligent
tutoring systems. Computers & Education, 60, 159-171. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compedu.2012.07.016.
Wang, P., Rowe, J. P., Min, W., Mott, B. W., & Lester, J. C. (2017). Interactive narrative personalization
with deep reinforcement learning. In: Proceedings of the Twenty-Sixth International Joint Conference on
Artificial Intelligence (pp. 3852-3858). https://doi.org/10.24963/ijcai.2017/538.
Wang, Y., Nguyen, H., Harpstead, E., Stamper, J. & McLaren, B.M. (2019). How does order of gameplay
impact learning and enjoyment in a digital learning game? In: Isotani S., Millán E., Ogan A., Hastings P.,
McLaren B., Luckin R. (eds). Proceedings of the 20th International Conference on Artificial Intelligence in
Education (AIED 2019). LNAI 11625 (pp. 518-531). Springer, Cham. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-03023204-7_43.
Warwick, K. (2017). "A Brief History of Deep Blue, IBM's Chess Computer". Mental Floss. From July 29,
2017. Retrieved November 9, 2020. https://www.mentalfloss.com/article/503178/brief-history-deep-blueibms-chess-computer.

46

Wiggins, J., Kulkarni, M., Min, W., Mott, B., Boyer, K., Wiebe, E., & Lester, J. (2018a). Affect-based early
prediction of player mental demand and engagement for educational games. In: Proceedings of the AAAI
Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Interactive Digital Entertainment (Vol. 14, No. 1). Retrieved from
https://ojs.aaai.org/index.php/AIIDE/article/view/13047.
Wiggins, J. B., Kulkarni, M., Min, W., Boyer, K. E., Mott, B., Wiebe, E., & Lester, J. (2018b). User affect
and no-match dialogue scenarios: An analysis of facial expression. In: Proceedings of the 4th
International Workshop on Multimodal Analyses Enabling Artificial Agents in Human-Machine Interaction
(pp. 6-14). https://doi.org/10.1145/3279972.3279979.
Wouters, P., & van Oostendorp, H. (Eds.). (2017). Instructional techniques to facilitate learning and
motivation of serious games. New York: Springer.
Wylie, R., & Chi, M. T. H. (2014). The self-explanation principle in multimedia learning. In R. E. Mayer
(Ed.), Cambridge handbooks in psychology. The Cambridge handbook of multimedia learning (p. 413–
432). Cambridge University Press. https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139547369.021.
Yannier, N., Hudson, S.E., Stampfer Wiese, E., & Koedinger, K.R. (2016). Adding physical objects to an
interactive game improves learning and enjoyment: Evidence from earthshake. ACM Transactions
Computer-Human Interaction 23, 4, Article 26 (September 2016), 31 pages.
doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2934668.
Yannier, N., Hudson, S.E., & Koedinger, K.R. (2020). Active learning is about more than hands-on:
Mixed-reality AI system to support STEM education. International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in
Education, 30, pages 74–96. doi: 10.1007/s40593-020-00194-3.
Yannier, N., Hudson, S.E., Crowley, K., Do, Y., & Koedinger, K.R. (2022). Intelligent Science Exhibits:
Transforming Hands-on Exhibits into Mixed-Reality Learning Experiences. To appear in the Journal of the
Learning Sciences.
Yannier, N., Hudson, S. E., Koedinger, K. R., Hirsh-Pasek, K., Golinkoff, R. M., Munakata, Y., ... &
Brownell, S. E. (2021). Active learning: “Hands-on” meets “minds-on”. Science, 374(6563), 26-30. DOI:
10.1126/science.abj99.
Young, T., Hazarika, D., Poria, S., & Cambria, E. (2018). Recent trends in deep learning based natural
language processing. IEEE Computational Intelligence Magazine, 13(3), 55-75.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/MCI.2018.2840738.
Zeng, J., Parks, S., & Shang, J. (2020). To learn scientifically, effectively, and enjoyably: A review of
educational games. Human Behavior and Emerging Technologies 2(2), 186-195.
https://doi.org/10.1002/hbe2.188.
Zimmerman, B.J. & Schunk, D.J. (2008). Self-regulated learning and academic achievement: Theoretical
perspectives. Second Edition. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. ISBN: 978-1-4612-8180-1.
Zohaib, M. (2018). Dynamic difficulty adjustment (DDA) in computer games: A review. Advances in
Human-Computer Interaction, 2018, 1-12. https://doi.org/10.1155/2018/5681652.

47

