International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education
https://doi.org/10.1007/s40593-022-00314-1
ARTICLE

Machine Learning and the Five Big Ideas in AI
David Touretzky1

· Christina Gardner‑McCune2 · Deborah Seehorn3

Accepted: 23 September 2022
© International Artificial Intelligence in Education Society 2022

Abstract
This article provides an in-depth look at how K-12 students should be introduced
to Machine Learning and the knowledge and skills they will develop as a result.
We begin with an overview of the AI4K12 Initiative, which is developing national
guidelines for teaching AI in K-12, and briefly discuss each of the “Five Big Ideas in
AI” that serve as the organizing framework for the guidelines. We then discuss the
general format and structure of the guidelines and grade band progression charts and
provide a theoretical framework that highlights the developmental appropriateness
of the knowledge and skills we want to impart to students and the learning experiences we expect them to engage in. Development of the guidelines is informed
by best practices from Learning Sciences and CS Education research, and by the
need for alignment with CSTA’s K-12 Computer Science Standards, Common Core
standards, and Next Generation Science Standards (NGSS). The remainder of the
article provides an in-depth exploration of the AI4K12 Big Idea 3 (Learning) grade
band progression chart to unpack the concepts we expect students to master at each
grade band. We present examples to illustrate the progressions from two perspectives: horizontal (across grade bands) and vertical (across concepts for a given grade
band). Finally, we discuss how these guidelines can be used to create learning experiences that make connections across the Five Big Ideas, and free online tools that
facilitate these experiences.
Keywords Artificial intelligence · Machine learning · AI4K12 Initiative · Five Big
Ideas in AI · Reasoning models · Grade band progression chart · K-12 AI education

* David Touretzky
dst@cs.cmu.edu
Christina Gardner‑McCune
gmccune@ufl.edu
Deborah Seehorn
deborah.seehorn@outlook.com
1

Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA

2

University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, USA

3

CS4NC / NC ECEP, Wilmington, NC, USA

13

Vol.:(0123456789)

International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education

Introduction
Children today grow up surrounded by AI technologies including speech and
facial recognition systems, intelligent assistants such as Alexa and Siri, recommender systems for products, news stories, and social media feeds, and nearlyautonomous automobiles with extensive driver assistance features. If Artificial
Intelligence is truly “the new electricity” (Andrew Ng, quoted in Jewell, 2019)
and a key component of the “fourth industrial revolution” (Qiang & Chao, 2018),
it is imperative that children understand it (Hasse et al., 2019; Druga et al., 2017).
Learning about AI has the potential to improve their critical thinking skills and
increase their confidence in interacting with computing systems. Educating children about AI is also important for civic reasons (Ali et al., 2021). Disruptive AI
technologies such as opaque and possibly biased automated decision-making systems (Buolamwini & Gebru, 2018; Kirkpatrick, 2016; Selbst, 2017a, 2017b; Van
Brakel, 2016), ubiquitous surveillance capabilities (McStay, 2020; Shachar et al.,
2020), and realistic deepfakes raise ethical issues (Diakopoulos & Johnson, 2021;
Rini, 2020) that should be confronted by a well-informed citizenry (Lao, 2020).
K-12 AI education is also needed to develop our future workforce (Zhang
et al., 2022). Companies recognize AI and specifically machine learning as integral to their ability to stay competitive, although they are still evaluating what
AI can do for their business (Deloitte, 2020; Gartner, 2020). AI is poised to
cause major shifts in the types of skills workers will need. Although some jobs
will disappear completely due to automation, most will evolve to integrate AI
into their daily workflow. New job opportunities will also arise to develop AIpowered solutions to business problems and drive new innovations (Gartner,
2020). While specific job descriptions and titles for AI-enabled careers are yet
to be determined, it is certain that future workers will understand the foundational building blocks of AI and be able to combine capabilities such as pattern
recognition, prediction, image classification, cognitive search, and natural language understanding to solve practical problems (Deloitte, 2020; Department of
Defense, 2018, 2019; SAS Institute, 2018).
Since 2018 the AI4K12 Initiative has been developing national guidelines for
teaching AI in K-12 (Touretzky et al., 2019a). We hope to give students more
than a superficial knowledge of AI terminology and applications. The guidelines
provide four levels of engagement: (1) awareness of AI in students’ everyday
lives and understanding of its societal impacts; (2) conceptual understanding of
how AI works from a systems level perspective and at an algorithmic level; (3)
the ethical and responsible design of automated decision-making systems using
AI; and (4) skills for applying AI to real-world problems. We believe the combination of these four levels of engagement will prepare K-12 students for AI-enabled careers of the future that span both technical and non-technical career paths.
In addition we hope to foster an appreciation for some of the profound ideas that
underlie our current understanding of human intelligence.
While our efforts focus on American students, K-12 AI education is becoming a priority world-wide. China has mandated that all K-12 stuñdents receive

13

International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education

instruction in AI and is pursuing a variety of approaches to realize this goal
(Petersen et al., 2021). The first AI textbook specifically for high school students
was published in China in 2018 (China Daily, 2018), and was followed by a series
of AI books designed for primary and secondary levels. The European Union is
developing AI education through its Erasmus+ program, which is focusing on
teaching AI in high schools (Universidad da Coruña, 2019). In 2022 UNESCO
released a survey of government-endorsed AI curricula that found 11 countries
with AI curricula already implemented (Armenia, Austria, Belgium, China, India,
Republic of Korea, Kuwait, Portugal, Qatar, Serbia, and United Arab Emirates),
and another 5 with government-endorsed curricula in development (Germany,
Jordan, Bulgaria, Saudi Arabia, and Serbia). The United States did not appear
in this list because the many AI curriculum resources developed there are not
government-endorsed (UNESCO, 2022), but the report does reference both Lao’s
Machine Learning Education Framework (Lao, 2020) and the AI4K12 guidelines
(AI4K12.org).
Recognizing the importance of AI education for K-12 students, the question then
becomes what exactly do K-12 students need to learn? We drew upon the expertise of AI researchers to identify the content that students should learn, and of
K-12 teachers to determine what students could learn. The guidelines for teaching
machine learning we put forward in this paper also align with research in the learning sciences and computer science education literature on how to effectively promote children’s learning of complex concepts.
Our current articulation of the guidelines is a series of grade band progression
charts covering Five Big Ideas in AI in grades K-2, 3–5, 6–8, and 9–12. A draft of
the chart for Big Idea 3 (Learning) was released for public feedback in November of
2020. In this paper we examine the content progression for Big Idea 3 in detail. We
consider:
• The logic behind our development of the content progression.
• The developmental appropriateness of the guidelines, aligning them with other

skills students are expected to have or develop within their grade band.

• The essential insights about machine learning, automated decision making, and

development of internal representations we hope students will acquire.

• The kinds of learning experiences we want students to have.
• The availability of tools to provide these experiences.
• The relationship of machine learning to the other big ideas in AI.

Related Work
AI involves many complex concepts such as statistical inference, parameterized reasoners (e.g., decision trees or neural networks), and algorithms for adjusting those
parameters (learning algorithms). Although research on how and what students can
learn about AI at different grade levels is still developing, research in the learning
sciences and computing education has shown that K-12 students can engage deeply
with complex topics. There are three key insights from these disciplines that we

13

International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education

think are applicable to AI Education: model building, experimentation, and construction of computational artifacts.
(1) Model Building. Learning Sciences research has shown that as learners create or interact with physical or computational models of scientific phenomena,
they develop and refine their own mental models of the phenomena (Lehrer &
Schauble, 2006; Linn, 2000; Chittleborough & Treagust, 2009). The Learning
By Design (LBD) approach (Kolodner et al., 1998) has shown that engaging
in design and modeling activities enhances learning about complex systems
through systematic exploration. For example, Hmelo et al. (2000) showed that
when children design artificial lungs and build partial working models of the
respiratory system, they develop an understanding of the system. Similarly, the
BodyVis project allows students to design interactive self-sensing wearables
that display the dynamic inner-workings of the wearer’s anatomy and allow
participants to explore how their emotions affected their physiology (Norooz
et al., 2016). These examples encourage us to expect that even young students,
when presented with opportunities to interact with AI models and create their
own models, will be able to develop understandings (i.e., mental models and
explanations) of AI concepts.
(2) Experimentation. Research on students’ experimentation with NetLogo’s
multi-agent models has shown such experimentation helps students develop
deep understandings of complex phenomena (Wilensky & Rand, 2015; Rand
& Wilensky, 2008. For example, in Wilensky and Rand (2015) students experimented with a series of simulations of the spread of fire through a forest. The
simulations allow students to vary the density of trees, probability of patch-topatch spread, wind direction, and long distance transport of sparks (called “big
jumps”). The simulations show that a fire’s chance of reaching the opposite
edge of the forest depends critically on the density of trees. One of the models
in particular highlights the behavior of a spark as a critical parameter that affects
the spread of the fire across unburned forest segments via big jumps. Studies
of student’s experimentation with the simulator have shown that it helps them
understand relationships between micro-level behavior (e.g., sparks) and the
emergent macro-level behavior that results (e.g., spread of a forest fire) (Wilkerson et al., 2008). More generally, studies of students experimenting with a
variety of NetLogo simulations have shown that representing difficult or often
misunderstood phenomena in terms of micro-level interactions better equips students to accurately describe, explain, and even predict the simulation’s behavior.
	  A growing collection of online demonstrations allows students to experiment
with AI. Google’s AI Experiments collection (2022) offers fun and engaging
experiences with a variety of AI technologies. More serious experimentation
tools include visualizations of neural networks, e.g., TensorFlow Playground
(Sato, 2016; Smilkov & Carter, 2016), CNN Explainer (Wang et al., 2020, 2021),
and FaceDemo (Makwana et al., 2022), exploration of word embeddings (Bandyopadhyay et al., 2022; Kahn et al., 2022), text generation or question answering
demonstrations using transformer networks (InferKit, Inc., 2020; Lane, 2021b),
and gridworld reinforcement learning simulators (IMAGINARY gGmbH, 2021;

13

International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education

Karpathy, 2015). But few studies have been published to date that explore how
experimentation with these tools helps students learn about important AI concepts.
(3) Construction of computational artifacts. The Constructionist learning
approach suggests that people learn particularly well by constructing personally meaningful artifacts (Kafai & Resnick, 1996). The work of the MIT Media
Lab has highlighted for years that we need to provide students access to computational tools with low floors, high ceilings, and wide walls that allow them to
create personally relevant computational artifacts (Resnick & Silverman, 2005).
This research has shown that creation of computational artifacts helps students
apply the concepts presented to them and is a key driver in their actual learning
of the concepts (Papavlasopoulou et al., 2019; Resnick et al., 2000). For example,
in MIT App Inventor, students are able to create mobile applications that can
be deployed on Android and iOS devices. In the process of developing these
applications they learn about event-based programming, user interface design
principles, and short-term and long-term data storage (Turbak et al., 2014).
These concepts are typically taught to upper level undergraduates due to their
complexity, but MIT App Inventor makes use and discussion of these concepts
easy and natural (Grover & Pea, 2013; Chatzinikolakis & Papadakis, 2014).
Similarly, Scratch can be used to create games and animated stories about topics of personal interest. In doing so, students engage in computational thinking
(e.g., problem decomposition and algorithm design) and make use of fundamental computing constructs such as loops, variables, conditionals, and functions
(Brennan & Resnick, 2012). Through this process they develop an understanding
of these concepts that is grounded in personal experience. In summary, when
students are provided with tools to create and not just consume technology, they
are inspired to express themselves, increase their interest in computing, and
develop their computational identity (Pang, 2022).
Extending the constructionist principles to AI education, researchers at MIT
and other institutions have developed AI extensions to several block-based programming environments. Examples include AI for MIT App Inventor (Van Brummelen et al., 2021), Cognimates (Druga, 2018a, b), Scratch Face Sensing Lab
(Scratch Team, 2021a, b), and AI blocks for Snap! (Kahn et al., 2020a, b). These
extensions allow students to create applications that incorporate AI components
such as speech recognition, sentiment analysis, and classifiers trained via machine
learning. Calypso (Touretzky, 2017) is another AI programming framework that
evolved from a children’s game development language: Microsoft’s Kodu Game
Lab (MacLaurin, 2011). Calypso incorporates speech recognition and generation,
computer vision, face detection, path planning, and robot control. Use of these
AI-enhanced programming frameworks can lead students to see themselves as not
just programmers, but AI application developers.
In developing the AI4K12 guidelines we’ve taken into account these insights
from the learning sciences and incorporated numerous opportunities for students to
develop models, experiment with mechanisms, and create computational artifacts.

13

International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education

Background on the AI4K12 Guidelines
In 2018 at the beginning of our development of the guidelines, we surveyed the
EAAI (Educational Advances in Artificial Intelligence) proceedings archives from
2010 to 2018 and found very little had been published on K-12 AI education that
provided even rudimentary guidance about what to teach K-12 students (Touretzky
et al., 2019c; Heinze et al., 2010). Most of the K-12 AI & ML publications focused
on teaching K-12 students robotics and merely mentioned that robotics provided a
motivating context to teach AI and CS concepts, without providing explicit examples. This is not surprising given the dominance of LEGO, FIRST Robotics, and
VEX robotics competitions, which are typically limited to simple color or light sensors and pre-programmed motion sequences even for the autonomous competitions.
As a result, these robotics platforms offer students very little exposure to AI, as most
of these robots were unable to see or hear (no camera or microphone), and offered
little onboard processing power. Similarly our search of the SIGCSE proceedings
and other computing education conferences in the ACM Digital Library and IEEE
Xplore Digital Library resulted in few references to teaching AI and machine learning at the K-12 or even undergraduate level. Thus, we turned to existing computer
science guidelines and leaned on the expertise of K-12 CS educators and university
AI faculty to help us assess what students were capable of understanding and the
best ways to adapt college-level AI concepts for K-12 students and teachers.
Existing Guidelines for K‑12 Computing Education
The K-12 Computer Science Framework (2016) and the CSTA K-12 Computer Science Standards (CSTA, 2017) define what K-12 students should know about computer science. They include a wide range of topics organized within five major concepts: (1) computing systems, (2) networks and the internet, (3) data and analysis,
(4) algorithms and programming, and (5) impacts of computing. When the CSTA
K-12 Computer Science Standards were released, only two standards referenced AI
(CSTA, 2017). Both were listed in the advanced high school grade band within the
algorithms and programming concept (Fig. 1). Standard 3B-AP-08 involves identifying and communicating the use of AI in software and physical systems, while
3B-AP-09 asks students to create an AI game agent.
Beyond these two explicit AI standards, there are several other standards that provide hooks for CS teachers to explore AI concepts, such as data collection, inference & models (e.g., 2-DA-08, 1B-DA-07), designing computational artifacts to

Fig. 1  The two references to AI in the 2017 CSTA Computer Science Standards

13

International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education

solve societal problems (e.g., 3A-AP-16), evaluation of artifacts and their impacts
(e.g., 3A-IC-29), and discussion of bias in the design of computing systems (e.g.,
2-IC-21 and 3A-IC-25). See Table 1 for expanded descriptions of these examples.
In response to the limited coverage of AI concepts in the CSTA Computer Science
Standards, the AI4K12 Initiative was launched in summer 2018 with the primary
purpose of developing guidelines for what every student should know about and
be able to do with AI. The development of these guidelines was modeled after the
CSTA standards process (AAAI, 2018; Touretzky, 2018).
While AI and data science were becoming common in media articles and higher
education offerings at the time we started developing the AI4K12 guidelines, very
little had been defined for K-12 students. However, a year after we began our work,
the Introduction to Data Science Curriculum Framework (DSCF) was released in
2019 (IDSSP, 2019). The purpose of the Data Science curriculum framework is “to
provide specifications for the development of a modern Data Science Curriculum
that can be customized to local requirements” and be used for students in their last
two years of high school. (IDSSP, 2019, p. 9). As such, the DSCF framework is
organized into two units and its learning objectives broadly focus on helping students (1) understand and manipulate data, (2) develop a practical understanding of
when data science can be used to solve problems, and (3) develop skills to use data
science tools and techniques to solve problems. The developers of the DSCF state
that while the framework gives students some preliminary skills in using a programming language and experience with automation, the main focus is on helping students understand the power of the tools and the importance of managing data carefully (IDSSP, 2019). While the DSCF is meant as a guide to develop curriculum, its
comprehensive articulation of learning objectives for Data Science knowledge also
define what K-12 students should know and be able to do with data science in the
current absence of standards or guidelines.
There are several areas of overlap between the DSCF and the treatment of
machine learning and societal impacts of AI in the AI4K12 Guidelines. Table 2
highlights the complementary and overlapping areas between the two frameworks.
At the intersection of the DSCF and the AI4K12 Guidelines, there are significant
overlaps in the areas of supervised and unsupervised learning such as: (1) selection
of algorithms for classification or prediction; (2) partitioning of the dataset to evaluate the performance of the model; (3) creating decision tree classifiers and predictors; (4) training a classification or regression model; and (5) ethics of working with
data and detecting and avoiding bias in datasets. The overlapping concepts described
in the DSCF represent only a portion of the Big Idea 3 (Learning) concepts. The
DSCF has a heavy focus on using ML to solve problems and using data science techniques to understand data and when to use different types of ML that goes beyond
the AI4K12 Big Idea 3 guidelines. For example, the DSCF (1) explicitly asks students to pose classification and prediction questions, (2) provides explicit guidance
on how to evaluate and measure performance of algorithms and models, and (3)
provides opportunities for students to learn the steps in the data-handling pipeline
and data wrangling techniques. Given the broader focus of the AI4K12 Guidelines
on machine learning in general, the Big Idea 3 (Learning) guidelines help students
understand how machine learning works through addressing three broad concepts:

13

13
1B-AP-15 Test and debug (identify and fix errors) a program or algorithm to ensure it runs as intended. (P6.1, P6.2)
1B-AP-16 Take on varying roles, with teacher guidance, when collaborating with peers during the design, implementation, and review
stages of program development. (P2.2)
2-AP-17 Systematically test and refine programs using a range of test cases. (P6.1)
3A-AP-21 Evaluate and refine computational artifacts to make them more usable and accessible. (P6.3)
3A-AP-23 Document design decisions using text,graphics, presentations, and/or demonstrations in the development of complex programs.
(P7.2)
1A-IC-16 Compare how people live and work before and after the implementation or adoption of new computing technology. (P7.0)
1B-IC-19 Brainstorm ways to improve the accessibility and usability of technology products for the diverse needs and wants of users.
(P1.2)
2-IC-21 Discuss issues of bias and accessibility in the design of existing technologies. (P1.2)
3A-IC-25 Test and refine computational artifacts to reduce bias and equity deficits. (P1.2)
3A-IC-28 Explain the beneficial and harmful effects that intellectual property laws can have on innovation. (P7.3)
3A-IC-29 Explain the privacy concerns related to the collection and generation of data through automated processes that may not be
evident to users. (P7.2)
3A-IC-30 Evaluate the social and economic implications of privacy in the context of safety, law, or ethics. (P7.3)

Program Development

Culture

Safety, Law, & Ethics

Program Development

Impacts of Computing

3A-AP-16 Design and iteratively develop computational artifacts for practical intent, personal expression, or to address a societal issue by
using events to initiate instructions. (P5.2)

Control

1A-DA-07 Identify and describe patterns in data visualizations, such as charts or graphs, to make predictions. (P4.1)
1B-DA-07 Use data to highlight or propose cause-and-effect relationships, predict outcomes, or communicate an idea. (P7.1)
3A-DA-12 Create computational models that represent the relationships among different elements of data collected from a phenomenon
or process. (P4.4)

Inference & Models

Algorithms & Programming

2-DA-08 Collect data using computational tools and transform the data to make it more useful and reliable. (P6.3)

Collection, Visualization, &
Transformation

Data & Analysis

Relevant CSTA Standard

Subconcept

Concept

Table 1  Hooks for Teaching AI within the 2017 CSTA Computer Science Standards

International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education

Topic Area 1.3 SUPERVISED LEARNING
Understand how algorithms/models are evaluated to measure
performance
- Use software to calculate misclassification rates
- Compare classification algorithms/models and decide which
is the better for a given situation based on total misclassification rate
- Explain how algorithms/models can be used to predict
numerical outcomes, and explain how a goodness of fit
measure can be used to quantify the success of the prediction
- Understand what overfitting is
Understand how "set aside" data are used and why they are
important
- Use a set-aside data set to compare classification algorithms/
models
- Use a validation dataset to compare trees for prediction

Topic Area 1.3 SUPERVISED LEARNING
Understand what sort of problems can be solved with classification
- Pose classification questions and identify situations that call
for classification
- Provide an algorithm to classify categorical outcomes
- Pick an algorithm to classify categorical data
- Pick an algorithm to predict based on 1–2 features

3-A-iv: Nature of Learning:
Constructing vs. using a reasoner
3-A-vi.9–12 LO: Select the appropriate type of machine learning algorithm (supervised, unsupervised, or reinforcement learning) to solve a
reasoning problem

(1) Selection of algorithms for
classification or prediction

(2) Partitioning of the dataset to 3-A-i.9–12 Unpacked: The cross-validation set is used to avoid
overfitting. The test set consists of examples that were not used during
evaluate the performance of
training or for cross-validation, so it
the model
provides an unbiased prediction of the reasoner’s performance on new
inputs
3-C-iii: Datasets: Bias
3-C-iii.6–8 LO: Explain how the choice of training data shapes the
behavior of the classifier, and how bias can be introduced if the training set is not properly balanced
3-C-iii.9–12 LO: Investigate imbalances in training data in terms of
gender, age, ethnicity, or other demographic variables that could result
in a biased model, by using a data visualization tool

Curriculum Framework for
Introductory Data Science (DSCF)

AI4K12 Guidelines

Areas of Alignment

Table 2  Intersection between the Curriculum Framework for Introductory Data Science (2019) & AI4K12 Guidelines (AI4K12.org)

International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education

13

Topic Area 1.3 SUPERVISED LEARNING
Understand what sort of problems can be solved with classification
- Understand how Classification and Regression Trees (CART)
are used to classify. Fit a tree, interpret and evaluate the
performance
- Describe an algorithm to generate a tree to predict numerical
outcomes using 1 or 2 features/variables
- Fit and interpret a regression tree using software

3-A-v: Nature of Learning: Adjusting internal representations
3-A-v.3–5 LO: Analyze a game where one constructs a decision tree,
describing the organization of the tree and the learning algorithm used
to add nodes
3-A-v.6–8 LO: Compare how a decision tree learning algorithm works
vs. how a neural network learning algorithm
works

3-A-iii: Nature of Learning: Training a model
3-A-ii.9–12 LO: Model how machine learning constructs a reasoner for
classification or prediction by adjusting the reasoner’s parameters (its
internal representations)
3-A-iii: Nature of Learning: Training a model
3-A-iii.K-2 LO: Demonstrate how to train a computer to recognize
something
3-A-iii.3–5 LO: Train a classification model using machine learning,
and then examine the accuracy of the model on new inputs
3-A-iii.6–8 LO: Train and evaluate a classification or prediction model
using machine learning on a tabular dataset
3-A-iii.9–12 LO: Use either a supervised or unsupervised learning algorithm to train a model on real world data, then evaluate the results

(3) Creating decision tree classifiers and predictors

(4) Training a classification or
regression model

Topic Area 1.3 SUPERVISED LEARNING
- Understand how Classification and Regression Trees (CART)
are used to classify. Fit a tree, interpret and evaluate the
performance
- Provide an algorithm to classify categorical outcomes
Topic Area 2.5 UNSUPERVISED LEARNING
- Explain the iterative process of one clustering algorithm such
as K-means
- Use software to prepare data, apply K-means clustering and
interpret the results

Curriculum Framework for
Introductory Data Science (DSCF)

AI4K12 Guidelines

Areas of Alignment

Table 2  (continued)

International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education

13

Curriculum Framework for
Introductory Data Science (DSCF)
Topic Area 1.3 SUPERVISED LEARNING
Express what data are and what they are used for Importance
of data quality
Topic Area 1.7 AVOID BEING MISLED BY DATA​
To provide students with a deeper understanding of how to
critique data and data-based claims, including an appreciation of the ideas of bias, confounding and random error
Topic Area 2.5 UNSUPERVISED LEARNING
Distinguish between data that are appropriate for supervised
versus unsupervised learning based on its structure, particularly the presence and roles of inputs and outputs

AI4K12 Guidelines

3-A-iii: Nature of Learning: Finding patterns in data
3-A-ii.K-2 LO: Identify patterns in labeled data and determine the
features that predict labels
3-A-ii.3–5 LO: Model how supervised learning identifies patterns in
labeled data
3-A-ii.6–8 LO: Model how unsupervised learning finds patterns in
unlabeled data
3-C-i: Datasets: Feature sets
3-C-i.K-2 LO: Create a labeled dataset with explicit features to illustrate
how computers can learn to classify things like foods, movies, or toys
3-C-i.3–5 LO: Create a labeled dataset with explicit features of several
types and use a machine learning tool to train a classifier on this data
3-C-i.6–8 LO: Create a dataset for training a decision tree classifier or
predictor and explore the impact that different feature encodings have
on the decision tree
3-C-i.9–12 LO: Compare two real world datasets in terms of the features they comprise and how those features are encoded
3-C-iii: Datasets: Bias
3-C-ii.3–5 LO: Illustrate how training a classifier for a broad concept
such as "dog" requires a large amount of data to capture the diversity
of the domain
3-C-ii.9–12 LO: Evaluate a dataset used to train a real AI system by
considering the size of the dataset, the way that the data were acquired
and labeled, the storage required, and the estimated time to produce
the dataset
3-A-iv: Nature of Learning: Constructing vs. using a reasoner
3-A-iv.3–5 LO: Demonstrate how training data are labeled when using a
machine learning tool
3-A-iv.9–12 LO: Illustrate what happens during each of the steps
required when using machine learning to construct a classifier or
predictor

Areas of Alignment

(5) Nature of data and datasets

Table 2  (continued)

International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education

13

AI4K12 Guidelines

(6) Ethics of working with data 3-C-ii: Datasets: Large datasets
EU: A large dataset is typically required to capture the diversity of a
and detecting and avoiding
complex domain and narrow down the range of possible reasoner
bias in datasets
behaviors. There are multiple ways to construct, clean, and verify a
dataset. There can be large costs associated with creating the dataset
and processing the data. Labeling training data is labor intensive and
may require specialized expertise (e.g., spotting disease in x-rays.)
Bias can be introduced during each step of dataset creation
3-C-iii: Nature of Learning: Training a model
3-C-iii.K-2 LO: Examine a labeled dataset and identify problems in the
data that could lead a computer to make incorrect predictions
3-C-iii.3–5 LO: Examine features and labels of training data to detect
potential sources of bias
3-C-iii.6–8 LO: Explain how the choice of training data shapes the
behavior of the classifier, and how bias can be introduced if the training set is not properly balanced
3-C-iii.9–12 LO: Investigate imbalances in training data in terms of
gender, age, ethnicity, or other demographic variables that could result
in a biased model, by using a data visualization tool
Big Idea 5 Societal Impacts

Areas of Alignment

Table 2  (continued)

Topic Area 1.3 SUPERVISED LEARNING
- Heighten awareness of how ethical issues can arise in the
various steps of the cycle (especially in the data gathering
stage)
- Heighten awareness of potential dangers of misuse and abuse
to pay specific attention to issues relating to data quality,
questioning skills, and presentation skills
Topic Area 1.1 SOCIAL & ETHICAL ISSUES
- Express what data are and where they come from
- Identify and describe errors in decisions and predictions
owing to faulty use of data
- Discuss how and when data can support making decisions
- Provide examples of the social and personal consequences of
predictions derived from models built on data

Curriculum Framework for
Introductory Data Science (DSCF)

International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education

13

International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education

Nature of Learning, Neural Networks, and Datasets. The AI4K12 guidelines extend
student learning beyond the learning objectives covered in the data science curriculum framework into understanding (1) differences between human learning and
machine learning; (2) how neural networks are constructed and work; and (3) the
difference between constructing versus using a reasoner.
Other Relevant Educational Standards
Current K-12 standards such as the Common Core (CC) and the Next Generation
Science Standards (NGSS) offer rigorous guidance for teaching STEM concepts,
and developmentally appropriate introductions to inquiry, analysis, and problemsolving, that can help prepare students for learning AI. But they provide no AI content knowledge. The NRC Framework for K-12 Science Education, which informed
the development of the NGSS, identifies five Science and Engineering Practices that
align well with the skills students need to engage with AI (NRC, 2012). They are (1)
Asking questions (for science) and defining problems (for engineering); (2) Developing and using models; (3) Planning and carrying out investigations; (4) Analyzing
and interpreting data; and (5) Constructing explanations and designing solutions.
For example, in the 3–5 grade band students are expected to be able to “develop and/
or use models to describe and/or predict phenomena” (National Research Council,
2013a. p. 387), which aligns well with the AI4K12 Guideline 3-A-iii which reads
“Train a classification model using machine learning, and then examine the accuracy of the model on new inputs” (AI4K12.org, 2020). In addition, we identified
several cross-cutting themes within NGSS that align well with the skills students
need to engage deeply with AI concepts and understand how AI systems work. For
example, NGSS’s “Patterns” theme provides a foundation in skills for observing
“patterns of forms and events that guide organization and classification.” Observations of patterns “prompt questions about relationships and the factors that influence them” (National Research Council, 2013b. p. 413). This cross-cutting theme
aligns with AI4K12 Guideline 3-A-ii which reads “Identify patterns in labeled data
and determine the features that predict labels” (AI4K12.org, 2020). Table 3 provides
additional examples of AI-enabling practices within the NGSS’s Science & Engineering Practices, NRC’s Cross-cutting themes, and Common Core’s English and
Language Arts (ELA) and Literacy standards.
One of the goals of the AI4K12 Guidelines and the Five Big Ideas in AI is to
equip students to understand, evaluate, and explain the societal impacts of AI-enabled technologies (Touretzky et al., 2019b). Within the Common Core Standards
(CCS) there are several English and Language Arts and Literacy (ELA/Literacy)
standards that align well with this goal, such as “RI.3.3 Describe the relationship
between a series of historical events, scientific ideas or concepts, or steps in technical procedures in a text, using language that pertains to time, sequence, and cause/
effect (3-LS3-1)” (NGA Center for Best Practices & CCSSO, 2010a). We want students to understand the technical steps in developing AI-enabled systems and the
places where human decision-making can have immediate and long-term effects
on the people who use those systems. For example, students should be able to

13

13
Modeling in 3–5 builds on K–2 experiences and progresses to building and
revising simple models and using models to represent events and design
solutions
Develop and/or use models to describe and/or predict phenomena
In 6–8, students can develop and/or revise a model to show the relationships among variables, including those that are not observable but predict
observable phenomena
In 9–12, students can develop and/or use a model (including mathematical and computational) to generate data to support explanations, predict
phenomena, analyze systems, and/ or solve problems
Analyzing data in 3–5 builds on K–2 experiences and progresses to introducing
quantitative approaches to collecting data and conducting multiple trials of
qualitative observations. When possible and feasible, digital tools should be
used
Analyze and interpret data to make sense of phenomena using logical reasoning
Generate and compare multiple solutions to a problem based on how well
they meet the criteria and constraints of the design solution

Developing and Using Models

Planning and Carrying out Investigations

Analyzing and Interpreting Data

Constructing Explanations and Designing Solutions

Asking Questions (for Science) and Defining Problems (for In K-2, students can ask questions based on observations to find more inforEngineering)
mation about the natural and/or designed world(s)
In 3–5, students can ask questions that can be investigated and predict reasonable outcomes based on patterns such as cause and effect relationships

Defining the system under study—specifying its boundaries and making
explicit a model of that system—provides tools for understanding and testing ideas that are applicable throughout science and engineering
In 3–5, A system can be described in terms of its components and their
interactions
In 6–8, Models can be used to represent systems and their interactions—such
as inputs, processes and outputs—and energy, matter, and information
flows within systems

4. Systems and System Models

Science and Engineering Practices: NRC Framework
for K-12 Science Education (NRC, 2012)

Observed patterns of forms and events guide organization and classification,
and they prompt questions about relationships and the factors that influence
them
Similarities and differences in patterns can be used to sort, classify, and
analyze simple rates of change for natural phenomena

1. Patterns

NGSS
(NSTA, 2014)

Examples of Standards

Practice or Cross-Cutting Theme

Framework

Table 3  Select NGSS, NRC Framework for K-12 Science, and Common Core Standards that are relevant to AI instruction

International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education

Practice or Cross-Cutting Theme

ELA/Literacy

Framework

Common Core

Table 3  (continued)

RI.3.3Describe the relationship between a series of historical events, scientific ideas or concepts, or steps in technical procedures in a text, using
language that pertains to time, sequence, and cause/effect. (3-LS3-1)
W.3.2Write informative/explanatory texts to examine a topic and convey
ideas and information clearly. (3-LS3-1)
SL.3.4 “Report on a topic or text, tell a story, or recount an experience with
appropriate facts and relevant, descriptive details, speaking clearly at an
understandable pace. (3-LS3-1)

Examples of Standards

International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education

13

International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education

identify how the choice of data used to train a decision-making system will impact
the system’s predictions and affect the lives of the populations who use that system
(Touretzky et al., 2019b).
The AP Computer Science Principles Exam is one of the first computer science
exams to require students to explain design choices, computing technologies, and algorithms at the K-12 level (College Board, 2020). Many of the AI4K12 Guidelines also
ask students to explain concepts, such as 3-A-iv Constructing vs. Using a Reasoner,
which reads “Explain the difference between training and using a reasoning model.”
Guidelines like these align well with the CCS “W.3.2 Write informative/explanatory
texts to examine a topic and convey ideas and information clearly (3-LS3-1)” (NGA
Center for Best Practices & CCSSO, 2010b). Moreover, we want students to be able
to read critically about AI, both in news reports and in case-studies of AI technologies (Touretzky et al., 2019b). This skillset builds on CCS SL.3.4 “Report on a topic or
text, tell a story, or recount an experience with appropriate facts and relevant descriptive
details, speaking clearly at an understandable pace (3-LS3-1)” (NGA Center for Best
Practices & CCSSO, 2010c). While ELA/Literacy skills are not common in computer
science and technical courses, these skills are essential for students to be able to critically explore AI and understand the limits and the boundaries of their own knowledge.

Five Big Ideas in AI
With little external guidance from the literature on the content and scope of AI education for K-12 students, the AI4K12 Steering Committee (David Touretzky, Christina Gardner-McCune, Fred Martin, and Deborah Seehorn) began their work in
2018 by formulating a list of “Five Big Ideas in AI” that would serve as the organizing framework for the guidelines (Touretzky et al., 2019a). This was modeled after
the CSTA Computing Standards, which are organized around five major concepts as
described earlier (CSTA, 2017). Figure 2 is an infographic illustrating the Five Big
Ideas in AI. Summarized briefly, the ideas are:
1. Perception: Computers perceive the world using sensors. Perception is the extraction of meaning from sensory signals, using knowledge.
2. Representation and Reasoning: Agents maintain representations of the world
and use them for reasoning. Representation drives reasoning; reasoners operate
on representations.
3. Learning: Computers can learn from data. A machine learning algorithm constructs a reasoner by adjusting the internal representations of a reasoning model,
such as a decision tree or a neural network.
4. Natural Interaction: Intelligent agents require many kinds of knowledge in order
to interact naturally with humans. This includes knowledge about language,
“common sense” and cultural knowledge, and knowledge about human emotions.
5. Societal Impact: AI can impact society in both positive and negative ways. Relevant issues include fairness, bias, and transparency of automated decision-making
systems, economic impacts of automation, cultural aspects of living with intelligent machines, and applications of AI for social good

13

International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education

An informational poster designed for classroom use that describes the Five Big
Ideas was released in 2019 and has been translated into 16 languages. These are
available at the AI4K12.org website.

Guidelines Development Process
The Steering Committee assembled a Working Group composed of 16 K-12 teachers, plus 9 individuals with other types of expertise such as AI research, CS education research, curriculum development, and district and state leadership. The K-12
teachers were organized in four grade bands (K-2, 3–5, 6–8, and 9–12). Each had
multiple years of experience teaching children in their grade band; most were still
working in the classroom (n = 13), but a few had moved on to teacher training or
administrative positions (n = 3). However, most of the teachers had little or no familiarity with AI when they joined the project. Five people stepped down at the end of
year 1, and we recruited three replacements. In addition, an Advisory Board was
formed that eventually grew to a dozen members representing industry, academia,
the US government, nonprofits, and overseas curriculum development projects
(AI4K12.org, 2022).
Figure 3 outlines the guidelines development process. The working group
addressed the five big ideas one at a time. For each big idea, we held tutorial sessions to familiarize members with the relevant AI concepts. These were supplemented by select videos, unplugged activities, and online demonstrations to deepen
their engagement with the concepts. Following these large group sessions, each
grade band held its own weekly or bi-weekly video meetings, and its members also
worked asynchronously, to develop concept treatments for the focal big idea that set
out the major concepts and subconcepts and accompanying skills. A key contribution of the K-12 working group members at this stage was their evaluation of the
developmental appropriateness of various AI concepts through alignment with content, skills, and practices used in teaching general STEM and CS topics. Following
this grade band work, we held monthly video meetings of the entire Working Group
where the grade bands discussed their formulations of the AI concepts and skills
appropriate for their students. Initially these were presented as slide decks; later they
were assembled into spreadsheets. Through discussions of the grade band work we
identified key themes and potential misconceptions in the concept treatments, and
checked alignment with STEM and computing concepts and socio-emotional learning goals. After the grade bands incorporated this feedback, the next step was to
merge the four grade band concept treatments into a unified spreadsheet, aligning
topics and language as much as possible. The result gave a blueprint for the level of
depth at which the concepts should be addressed. The grade bands were given time
to do cross-grade band work to smooth out the horizontal progression, and within
their own grade band spent some time smoothing out the vertical progression.
By the end of Year 2, the steering committee and advisory board recognized
that our understanding of the concepts students should be learning had evolved
over time and there were some concepts that were underdeveloped, others

13

International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education

Fig. 2  The “Five Big Ideas in AI” infographic developed by the AI4K12 Initiative

overdeveloped, and some that were missing. In addition, there were several places
where lower grade bands were proposing more advanced work than the succeeding grade band, while in other places adjacent grade bands were doing the same
thing. There were also editorial concerns about use of consistent language across
the grade bands. Therefore, the Steering Committee drafted a revised synthesis
document by starting with a fresh concept list and importing ideas from the unified spreadsheet produced by the grade bands, aligning rows and columns to use
uniform language. The synthesis document was then critiqued by members of the
Working Group and after revisions, it was released for public comment. Further
revisions are anticipated in response to comments received. As of this writing,
the Big Idea 1 (Perception) progression chart is undergoing revision, and Big
Ideas 2 (Representation and Reasoning), 3 (Learning), and 4 (Natural Interaction)
are undergoing public review. The synthesis for Big Idea 5 (Societal Impact) is in
development.

13

International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education

Fig. 3  The guidelines development process

The grade band progression chart for each big idea is a table in which the rows
are concepts and subconcepts and the columns are the four grade bands. For each
cell in the table, the guideline offers a Learning Objective (what students should
be able to do) and an Enduring Understanding (what students should know).
These are sometimes accompanied by Unpacked descriptions that amplify the LO
or EU. Figure 4 shows the progression for the “Humans vs. machines” subconcept
of the “Nature of Learning” main concept in the Big Idea 3 progression chart.

Big Idea 3: What Every K‑12 Student Should Know About Machine
Learning
Big Idea 3 (Learning) is intended to immerse students in the richness and complexity of Machine Learning. The first step is to demystify what machine learning
is and how it works. To understand this students need to acquire four essential
insights about machine learning:
1. Definition of machine learning: Machine learning allows a computer to acquire
behaviors without people explicitly programming those behaviors. This paraphrases a widely-cited definition often attributed to Arthur Samuel (Wikipedia,
2021, fn. 2), who coined the term “machine learning” (Samuel, 1959). Using
learning to induce a behavior is very different from the usual approach to constructing computing applications by explicitly programming each step.
2. How machine learning algorithms work: Learning new behaviors results from
changes the learning algorithm makes to the internal representations of a reasoning model, such as a decision tree or a neural network. The essential insight
here is that the learning algorithm is constructing a reasoner. In a decision tree,
this means adding new nodes. In a neural network it means adjusting the weights.
What we want students to understand is that this kind of learning is a simple,
mechanical process; there is no self-awareness or any kind of magic involved.
More ambitious types of learning, such as learning new concepts or learning

13

International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education

Fig. 4  The progression for Big Idea 3, Concept A: Nature of Learning, subconcept i: Humans vs.
machines

by demonstration, while the subject of current research, are not included in the
guidelines because they are not yet successful enough to have real-world impact
3. The role of training data: When the reasoning model is capable of a great variety
of behaviors, large amounts of training data are required to narrow down the learning algorithm’s choices. Popular accounts of machine learning often emphasize the
massive amounts of data required, but this is not always true. Common misconceptions hold that high dimensional input spaces or large numbers of output classes
require large training sets. It is actually model complexity that drives the need for
data. If the desired reasoning behavior can be described by a simple model, a small
amount of data may suffice. But classifiers with complex decision boundaries and
function approximators with highly nonlinear input–output relationships cannot be
realized by simple models. What we want students to understand is that people are
able to learn from small numbers of examples because they use their prior knowledge and intuition to choose models that favor “sensible” solutions. Computers are
not yet good at this. Therefore the computer must resort to complex models with
many parameters. And accurately estimating these parameter values requires many
training examples. Structured architectures such as convolutional neural networks
or transformer networks are attempts to incorporate prior knowledge into models
in ways that are sensible but not too restrictive.
4. Learning phase vs. application phase: The reasoner constructed by the machine
learning algorithm can be applied to new data to solve problems or make decisions. In the learning phase, the learning algorithm is constructing a reasoner
using the training data. When it runs the reasoner on the training data and assesses
the results, the focus is on improving the reasoner’s behavior. In the application
phase the reasoner is no longer tied to the learning algorithm or training data. It
is simply processing inputs and producing outputs.

13

International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education

The Big Idea 3 progression chart (AI4K12.org, 2020) expands these essential
insights by introducing students to three major concepts. Table 4 lists these three
concepts and the subconcepts contained in each.
Section A: Nature of Learning
This first section introduces the major concepts in machine learning and the skills
students need to develop. The latter include training a reasoning model and measuring the model’s accuracy on new inputs.
3-A-i: Humans vs. machines. It is important for students to appreciate that
machines do not learn the way humans do. Both people and computers can learn
by finding patterns in data, but humans are flexible learners who also learn in
other ways, such as by direct instruction, by observing others, by asking questions, by experimentation, or by making connections to past experience. In contrast, computers use specialized algorithms that learn to solve narrowly defined
problems. In the K-8 grades we ask students to make this distinction. In 9–12
we ask them to define the three major categories of machine learning algorithms
(supervised, unsupervised, and reinforcement learning) and draw analogies with
human learning situations, e.g., supervised learning is like having a coach telling
you what you’re doing wrong.
3-A-ii: Finding patterns in data. This is the essence of machine learning. In
K-2 and 3–5 we ask students to identify patterns in labeled data by inspection.
In K-2 they express the rules informally, while in 3–5 they draw a decision
tree. In 6–8 we introduce unsupervised learning and ask students to model
how clustering works. In 9–12 we delve deeper into supervised learning and
ask students to model how classification or prediction problems are solved by
an incremental learning algorithm, by manually adjusting the parameters of a
polynomial regression model to reduce the overall error. This is an analogy to
the iterative gradient descent optimization used in the backpropagation learning algorithm, but without having to actually measure the error gradient.
3-A-iii: Training a model. Every student should have the experience of training
a reasoning model using a machine learning tool. In K-2 this would be a highly
scaffolded exercise using a tool like Teachable Machine (Phillips, 2019) to classify gestures or sounds. In higher grades students might use tabular data and a
tool like Machine Learning For Kids (Lane, 2021a). In 9–12 we emphasize working with real-world datasets, so students will be asked to train a predictor, classifier, or clusterer using a publicly available real-word dataset.
3-A-iv: Constructing vs. using a reasoner. This row is concerned with two topics:
the distinction between the learning phase and the application phase in machine
learning (the fourth essential insight mentioned earlier), and, in grades 9–12, all
the steps involved in constructing a reasoner and assessing the accuracy of the
trained reasoning model, including use of cross-validation and test datasets.
3-A-v: Adjusting internal representations. This row explores the second essential insight, that learning algorithms work by adjusting the internal representa-

13

International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education
Table 4  Big Idea 3 (Learning) concepts
(A) Nature of Learning
i. Humans vs. machines
ii. Finding patterns in data
iii. Training a model
iv. Constructing vs. using a reasoner
v. Adjusting internal representations
vi. Learning from experience

(B) Neural Networks
i. Structure of a neural network
ii. Weight adjustment
(C) Datasets
i. Feature sets
ii. Large datasets
iii. Bias

tions of a reasoning model. In grades 3–5 students reflect on how decision tree
learning works by successively adding nodes at the fringe of the tree. In 6–8 they
compare decision tree learning with neural network learning algorithms, while in
9–12 they also consider parameter adjustment in regression algorithms and policy
adjustment in reinforcement learning.
3-A-vi: Learning from experience. This row covers reinforcement learning. In
3–5 we want students to know about some of the applications of reinforcement
learning, e.g. that computers can become expert game players by playing against
themselves. In 6–8 students are asked to explain the difference between supervised learning and reinforcement learning, while in 9–12 they are asked to select
the most appropriate learning algorithm (supervised, unsupervised, or reinforcement learning) for various types of problems. Students should recognize that
reinforcement learning is appropriate for sequential decision problems.

Section B: Neural Networks
As a type of reasoning model neural networks are properly included in Big Idea 2 (Representation and Reasoning). But due to the prominent role deep neural networks play in
modern machine learning, and the fact that neural network reasoners are almost exclusively constructed by learning algorithms, we decided to cover them in Big Idea 3.
3-B-i: Structure of a neural network. This row covers the neural network as a reasoning model. Its components include connections, weights, and units with nonlinear
transfer functions. In grades 3–5 students are introduced to simple networks of one
to three binary threshold units. In grades 6–8 they learn about input, hidden, and output layers, and come to see neural networks as “wiggly” functions that map inputs to
outputs in complex ways. In grades 9–12 they learn about more sophisticated neural
network architectures such as recurrent and convolutional networks, and Generative
Adversarial Networks (GANs) that produce deepfakes.
3-B-ii: Weight adjustment. In this row students learn how changing the weights of a
neural network alters its behavior. In grades 3–5 they make the weight adjustments
themselves to get a network of 1–3 units to implement a desired behavior. In grades
6–8 they learn a simple weight adjustment rule that applies to single-layer networks.
In grades 9–12 they use a backpropagation learning tool such as TensorFlow Playground (Sato, 2016) to train a multilayer network and examine the changes that occur
to the weights and hidden unit response functions. However, we do not expect stu-

13

International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education

dents to learn the mathematics underlying backpropagation, as this involves vector
calculus. What we expect them to understand is that there is an equation for calculating an error signal, and that this signal originates at the output layer, is propagated
backward to earlier layers, and is used to adjust the weights coming into each layer.
Machine learning electives for advanced students in grades 11–12 might explore
backpropagation in greater depth and even derive the weight update equation via the
chain rule, but for most students this level of detail is too much.
Section C: Datasets
In the past decade, progress in machine learning has produced dramatic advances in
artificial intelligence applications including speech recognition, computer vision, and
machine translation. These advances have resulted from the ability to train large models
on massive datasets. But in some cases, training on problematic datasets has produced
systems that exhibit bias against certain classes of persons. Thus, it is important to understand how the choice of dataset affects the outcome of a machine learning experiment.
3-C-i: Feature sets. This row introduces the idea of describing training instances
as collections of features and explores how the choice of feature encoding can
influence learning. In grades 9–12 students may examine real-world datasets
(e.g., demographic or financial data) and compare the encoding schemes used.
3-C-ii: Large datasets. This row examines why large datasets are needed for complex problems, and investigates techniques and costs of labeling large amounts of
training data. Students may explore historically and scientifically significant datasets that are browsable online, such as the ImageNet and Coco datasets for object
recognition. In grades 9–12 they may evaluate large public datasets to estimate
their size and the cost of assembling, cleaning, and labeling the data.
3-C-iii: Bias. This row explores the effects of bias in a training set, a topic which
is further explored in Big Idea 5 (Societal Impact). One common source of bias
results from use of a non-representative sample, e.g., training a face detector on
a dataset skewed heavily toward Caucasian males may not produce acceptable
performance when the detector is tested on other types of people. Another potential source of bias results from the learning algorithm picking up on correlations
that reduce the classification error rate for the training set but result in disparate
treatment of certain groups based on historical factors that, for reasons of fairness,
should not be considered in decision making. In grades 9–12 students are exposed
to data exploration techniques that can uncover imbalances in a training set.

Experiences We Want Students to Have
Training a model We tell students that machines learn by finding patterns in data.
One way they can experience this firsthand is by training a classifier to discriminate
between classes they already understand. For example, a student could use Google’s

13

International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education

Teachable Machine (Phillips, 2019) to construct a visual classifier to distinguish
between a peace sign, a thumbs up gesture, and a “no gesture” baseline condition.
Good recognition rates can be achieved with training images that take only a couple of minutes to collect. This is a compelling demonstration of a computer making complex discriminations that feel intuitive to the student. The computer seems
“smart”. A crucial follow-up experiment is to test the robustness of the classifier by
seeing how well it does if the student makes the gestures with their other hand, or
with their hand held upside-down, or while wearing different clothing. The computer may seem less smart after exposing its limited generalization abilities. This is
an example of how experimentation can lead students to a deeper understanding of
complex phenomena.
Learning an unfamiliar concept from labeled examples Visual classifiers built from
deep neural networks, like Teachable Machine, are black boxes: their internal representations are not observable. There is another kind of machine learning experience
we want students to have, where the representations are visible. We want them to
understand what it “feels like” to discover patterns in data, i.e. to be the learner,
learning to perform a classification task by exposure to labeled examples. For this
we must choose classes the student is not already familiar with, so that their learning
will be driven purely by the training data, not prior knowledge. This can be done as
early as K-2 by asking students to learn a discrimination between cartoon drawings
of fish, some of which are labeled “poisonous” and some labeled “safe”. The fish
have a variety of attributes such as body color, head color, head shape, fin shape,
etc. Categories can be simple (e.g., purple fish are poisonous), but for older students
they can be made arbitrarily complex (e.g., purple fish with square heads, or red fish
with either round heads or yellow tails, are poisonous). As the space of admissible
hypotheses grows, more training examples are required to determine the correct one.
In K-2 students are only required to verbalize the rule they come up with, but in later
grades we may ask them to express their reasoning more formally, such as by constructing a decision tree, which we discuss next.
Constructing a decision tree using labeled data We can revisit the experience of
concept learning in more depth in grades 3–5 by having students construct actual
decision trees to perform the classification. This exposes them to the idea of formalizing knowledge as a data structure, and the tree is an example of an internal representation used by a reasoner. At this stage we’re still using cartoon images where
the feature set is implicit. At the next stage, grades 6–8, we introduce students to
the notion of designing an explicit feature set for describing training instances. For
example, they might invent a set of features for describing toys, or movies. At this
stage they can be introduced to an automated decision tree learning tool such as
MachineLearningForKids (Lane, 2021a), and can examine the decision trees that it
constructs. Since they are able to create their own training sets, they can experiment
to see how changes in the training data are reflected in changes to the decision tree.

13

International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education

Manual parameter optimization for regression learning (simulating how a neural
net learns by weight adjustment) Decision tree learning is a good place to start
because symbolic data structures are more intuitive, but a lot of the heavy lifting
in machine learning today is done by neural networks trained by gradient descent
learning algorithms. So another kind of experience we want students to have is
what it “feels like” to optimize a nonlinear function by parameter tuning. We can
do this without introducing gradients, and we would like students to adjust multiple parameters without having to deal with multidimensional inputs. So rather than
have them adjust the weights of a neural net, we envision them solving a regression
problem such as visually fitting a cubic polynomial to a plot of noisy data by tweaking sliders controlling its coefficients. Students could be asked to visually judge
the quality of the fit, or they could be given some assistance in the form of a continuous display of sum squared error. This exercise would help students intuitively
appreciate the complexity of searching a high dimensional parameter space and of
working with nonlinear functions, and the strategy of searching the space by making small changes. The hope is that they would develop a mental model of gradient
descent optimization that they can apply to their understanding of neural networks
without having to delve into the complexities of the backpropagation learning rule.
Exploring historically important datasets Certain datasets have played a prominent
role in the development of machine learning. Inviting students to explore these datasets online helps them connect with the history of the field, and gives them a feel for
the complexities of the training sets used to solve real-world problems. Examples
include the MNIST dataset of handwritten digits (LeCun et al., 2021), the ImageNet
dataset used in many image classification competitions (Deng et al., 2009), and the
CoCo object detection, segmentation, and captioning dataset (Lin et al., 2014). Both
ImageNet and Coco have web interfaces that facilitate online browsing.
Training on real‑world datasets One of the themes we emphasize in the 9–12
grade band is the use of real-world datasets to show students how the concepts they’re studying apply to problems in everyday life. Thus, when students
in grades 9–12 are asked to train a decision tree classifier or a neural network
regression model, we suggest that they do so in the context of solving a problem
of practical importance using real data. This could be financial, medical, socioeconomic, or consumer data. The growing interest in high school data science
courses, and in broadening K-12 mathematical education to include more statistics, aligns with this goal. Online machine learning repositories such as Kaggle
offer public domain datasets suitable for these exercises.

Tools For Exploring Machine Learning in K‑12
Several types of software tools support the learning experiences we want students to
have. First, we distinguish between “black box” demonstrations that allow students
to train a classifier, predictor, or clusterer but provide no insight into its operation,

13

International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education

and “glass box” demonstrations that expose the reasoning model’s internal representations and allow students to observe how they change with training.
The quintessential black box machine learning demonstration is Teachable
Machine (Phillips, 2019). It allows untrained users to quickly train a visual classifier
using webcam images or audio input. Internally it combines a pre-trained deep neural network architecture called MobileNet with some trainable weights at the output
layer, but users have no way of knowing this. Another popular tool for training various types of classifiers is MachineLearningForKids (Lane, 2021a), which is based
on the IBM Watson AI service. Although mainly a black box demo, in cases where
decision tree learning is used, MachineLearningForKids does offer a way to graphically display the decision tree. Code.org’s AI Lab is another easy to use machine
learning tool that does not require programming (Code.org, 2021). It uses a k-nearest neighbors algorithm rather than decision trees, and it can perform either classification or prediction. AI Lab includes a collection of built-in datasets but also allows
users to upload their own data from a CSV file.
What students get from black box learning demonstrations is, first of all, the experience of deciding on a set of classes and assembling a training set of labeled examples. And second, a chance to test the success of their training by measuring the
trained model’s performance on test inputs. In addition, some of these tools include
an option to export the trained classifier as a module that can be incorporated into
a JavaScript, Python, Scratch, or MIT App Inventor program, thus allowing students to build AI-powered artifacts of their own. See Gresse von Wangenheim et al.
(2021) for a review of 16 interactive machine learning tools for K-12.
A prime example of a glass box demonstration is Google’s TensorFlow Playground, which provides a visualization of a multi-layer neural network classifier
undergoing training via the backpropagation learning algorithm. To facilitate visualization, the input domain is restricted to points in the (x,y) plane, and there are just
two classes, represented by a single output unit. The user can control the number
of hidden layers and the number of units in each layer. Both the weights between
units and the response functions of the hidden units are graphically represented and
change as learning progresses. The tool includes built-in training sets for four classification problems of increasing complexity, from simple linearly-separable clusters,
to circle/surround, to XOR, to nested spirals.
Glass box demonstrations give insight into how the algorithm works. In the case of
TensorFlow Playground, students can see hidden units develop their response functions as training progresses, and they will observe that units in later layers develop
more complex decision boundaries by building on the units in earlier layers. The
drawback to glass box demonstrations is that they are typically limited to toy problems that are amenable to visualization. But some tools in this category may provide
a window into more complex models, e.g., an online implementation of a convolutional neural network for digit recognition might display all the feature maps.
Hybrid approaches are also possible. Hitron et al. (2019) present evidence that
uncovering just selected aspects of a black box machine learning exercise, giving
students a rough mental model of the process, results in enhanced understanding.

13

International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education

Relationship to the Other Big Ideas in AI
Big Idea 2, Representation and Reasoning, sets the stage for Big Idea 3 by introducing the notions of classes of reasoning problems (classification, prediction, etc.) and
families of reasoning algorithms for solving those problems. Big idea 2 also encompasses the relationship between reasoning and representation, which mirrors that of
algorithms and data structures in computer science: representations drive reasoning,
and reasoning algorithms operate on representations. Machine learning then introduces a new class of algorithm, the learning algorithm, that operates on a reasoner’s
internal representations.
There is also substantial contact between Big Idea 3 and Big Idea 5, Societal
Impact, due to concerns about the use of machine learning tools to construct automated decision making systems that may negatively impact people’s lives, e.g., systems that score credit or employment applications or predict criminal recidivism
rates. Problems with these systems can result from the use of biased or unrepresentative training data, or from the use of historically accurate training data that reflects
the results of past societal biases against certain marginalized groups.
In Big Idea 1, Perception, we define “perception” as the extraction of meaning from sensory signals using knowledge. Machine learning is now the dominant
approach for constructing these extraction mechanisms. Speech understanding and
visual object recognition are two examples of perceptual tasks that have become significantly more reliable in the last decade as a result of advances in neural network
learning.
Big Idea 4, Natural Interaction, covers a broad range of topics including natural
language understanding, emotion recognition, and commonsense reasoning. As with
perception, recent progress in machine learning has led to advances in some of these
areas. For example, many state of the art natural language applications, including
machine translation and question answering systems, are built using neural networks
trained on huge corpuses.

Desired Implementation of the AI4K12 Guidelines into Classrooms
Full implementation of the guidelines in the U.S. will require changes to state education standards to amend the requirements for universal K-12 computing education that are gradually being adopted today. Throughout the elementary grades (K-5)
the guidelines are designed to be integrated into existing course work, as there are
few opportunities to take a stand-alone elective in these grades. We envision AI
being taught in K-2 through unplugged activities, teacher-guided demonstrations,
and interactive experiences with AI technologies such as Alexa. This also holds for
grades 3–5, but as students begin programming in block-based frameworks such as
Scratch, they can take advantage of AI extensions to these frameworks to incorporate capabilities such as speech or object recognition into their programs, allowing
them to discover simple truths about AI.

13

International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education

Starting in middle school (grades 6–8) we imagine that students might have the
opportunity to take a stand-alone AI elective course or for AI to be integrated into
existing programming courses. In grades 9–12, students can take stand-alone AI and
computing courses and/or enroll in AI or computing Career Technical Education
(CTE) pathways commonly offered at US-based high schools. CTE pathways are
designed to help students explore their career interests and prepare for either college or employment. They consist of 3–4 courses that must be completed alongside
industry certifications to verify students’ knowledge. CTE courses often attract a
broad audience because they equip students with employable skills. Statewide CTE
pathways in AI have been implemented in both Florida (Florida Department of Education, 2022) and Georgia (Georgia Department of Education, 2021). An AI exam
for CTE students is available from Certiport (2021) as part of their IT Specialist
Certification program.
AI is also being incorporated into more general computing courses. Exploring
Computer Science (ECS), an introductory high school computing curriculum designed
to attract a broad range of students to computing, offers an optional AI module that
teachers can integrate into their course (Clark, 2019). Likewise, Carnegie Mellon’s
Python-based CS Academy includes an optional AI module in the CS2 course that
introduces students to classification, prediction, and neural networks (CMU CS Academy, 2021). We also imagine that AI can be integrated into existing AP Computer Science Principles and AP CS A courses, though this has not yet occurred.
Discussion of AI should not be confined to computing courses. AI topics intersect
with many parts of the curriculum, including mathematics, language arts, science,
social studies, music, and art. Introducing AI in these areas will require first educating non-CS teachers about these topics. For example, art teachers will be excited to
learn how machine learning-powered tools allow humans to partner with machines
to explore new avenues for creative expression. Examples include neural style transfer (Dumoulin et al., 2017), line drawing to image translators (Isola et al., 2017), and
text-to-image transformers (Saharia et al., 2022).

Conclusion
In this paper we have described the process of developing the AI4K12 Guidelines
and painted an ambitious picture of what AI in K-12 could look like. We have
also presented a novel view of how machine learning should be taught to K-12
students. First, our approach emphasizes the distinction between a reasoning
model and a learning algorithm. The job of the learning algorithm is to construct
a reasoner. It does this by adjusting the parameters of a reasoning model based on
training data. This framing of the learning process as parameter adjustment covers a wide range of reasoning models, including decision trees, neural networks,
k-means clustering, and Q-table driven action selection.
Second, when considering the kinds of learning experiences students should
have, we include not just training a reasoner, but also being the learning algorithm: trying to find patterns in data, or trying to adjust model parameters to

13

International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education

minimize output error. We believe this will help students develop better mental
models of how learning algorithms work.
Third, while machine learning was once considered an advanced topic in computer science, the grade band progression chart developed by the AI4K12 Working Group shows that even K-2 students can begin learning the rudiments of this
subject, such as recognizing patterns in a data set. If AI literacy is the new computer literacy, kindergarten is not too early to start.
The AI4K12 guidelines propose a content progression — one that has not yet
been tested in classrooms. Future research in AI education will need to develop
more detailed learning progressions to describe how students approach these
concepts, how their understanding develops over time, and the types of misconceptions they are prone to.
Acknowledgements We are grateful to our colleague Fred Martin, now an emeritus member of the
AI4K12 Steering Committee, for his important contributions to launching the AI4K12 Initiative and formulating the Five Big Ideas. We also thank the members of the AI4K12 Working Group and Advisory
Board for their diligent efforts in developing the guidelines.
Funding This work was supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant No. DRL-1846073.

Declarations
Competing interests The authors have no relevant financial or non-financial interests to disclose.

References
AAAI. (2018). AAAI Launches “AI for K-12” Initiative in collaboration with the Computer Science
Teachers Association (CSTA) and AI4All. https://​aaai.​org/​Press​room/​Relea​ses/​relea​se-​18-​0515.​pdf.
Accessed 18 Oct 2022
AI4K12.org. (2020). Big Idea 3 - Learning - K-12 Learning Progression. Release for Public Review
November 19, 2020. https://​ai4k12.​org/​wp-​conte​nt/​uploa​ds/​2021/​01/​AI4K12-​Big-​Idea-3-​Progr​
ession-​Chart-​Worki​ng-​Draft-​of-​Big-​Idea-3-​v.​11.​19.​2020.​pdf.
AI4K12.org. (2022). Working Group and Advisory Board Members. https://​ai4k12.​org/​worki​ng-​group-​
and-​advis​ory-​board-​membe​rs/. Accessed 18 Oct 2022
Ali, S., DiPaola, D., Lee, I., Sindato, V., Kim, G., Blumofe, R., & Breazeal, C. (2021). Children as
creators, thinkers and citizens in an AI-driven future. Computers and Education: Artificial
Intelligence, 2, 100040.
Bandyopadhyay, S., Xu, J., Pawar, N., & Touretzky, D. (2022). Interactive Visualizations of Word
Embeddings for K-12 Students. Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
36(11), 12713–12720. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1609/​aaai.​v36i11.​21548
Brennan, K., & Resnick, M. (2012). New Frameworks for Studying and Assessing the Development
of Computational Thinking. Proceedings of the 2012 Annual Meeting of the American Educational Research Association, Vol. 1, Vancouver, 13–17 April 2012, 25 p. http://​scrat​ched.​gse.​
harva​rd.​edu/​ct/​files/​AERA2​012.​pdf.
Buolamwini, J., & Gebru, T. (2018). Gender shades: Intersectional accuracy disparities in commercial
gender classification. Proceedings of the 1st Conference on Fairness, Accountability and Transparency, in Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, 81:77–91. Available from https://​proce​
edings.​mlr.​press/​v81/​buola​mwini​18a.​html. Accessed 18 Oct 2022
Certiport. (2021). AI Exam - Part of the IT Specialist Certification program. Retrieved from https://​certi​
port.​pears​onvue.​com/​Certi​ficat​ions/​ITSpe​ciali​st/​Certi​ficat​ion/​Overv​iew. Accessed 18 Oct 2022

13

International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education
Chatzinikolakis, G., & Papadakis, S. (2014). Motivating K-12 students learning fundamental Computer
Science concepts with App Inventor. 2014 International Conference on Interactive Mobile Communication Technologies and Learning (IMCL2014), 152–159. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1109/​IMCTL.​
2014.​70111​23
China Daily. (2018). First AI textbook for high school students released. Available online at https://​www.​
china​daily.​com.​cn/a/​201806/​11/​WS5b1​de85f​a3100​1b825​71f4ca.​html. Accessed June 30, 2022.
Chittleborough, G. D., & Treagust, D. F. (2009). Why models are advantageous to learning science. Educación Química, 20(1), 12–17.
Clark, B. (2019). Exploring Computer Science (ECS) Alternate Curriculum Unit: Artificial Intelligence. https://​www.​explo​ringcs.​org/​for-​teach​ers-​distr​icts/​artif​i cial-​intel​ligen​ce. Accessed 18 Oct
2022
CMU CS Academy. (2021). Our Curriculum. Carnegie Mellon University School of Computer Science,
accessed August 18, 2022. https://​acade​my.​cs.​cmu.​edu/​course-​info.
Code.org. (2021). AI and Machine Learning Module. https://​studio.​code.​org/s/​aiml-​2021. Accessed 18
Oct 2022
College Board. (2020). AP Computer Science Principles: Course and Exam Description. https://​apcen​tral.​
colle​geboa​rd.​org/​pdf/​ap-​compu​ter-​scien​ce-​princ​iples-​course-​and-​exam-​descr​iption.​pdf. Accessed
18 Oct 2022
CSTA. (2017). Computer Science Teachers Association (CSTA) K-12 Computer Science Standards,
Revised 2017. https://​www.​cstea​chers.​org/​page/​stand​ards. Accessed 18 Oct 2022
Deloitte. (2020). Thriving in the era of pervasive AI: Deloitte’s State of AI in the Enterprise. Deloitte AI
Institute and Deloitte Center for Technology, Media & Telecommunications. https://​www2.​deloi​
tte.​com/​conte​nt/​dam/​Deloi​tte/​cn/​Docum​ents/​about-​deloi​tte/​deloi​tte-​cn-​dtt-​thriv​ing-​in-​the-​era-​of-​
persu​asive-​ai-​en-​200819.​pdf. Accessed 18 Oct 2022
Deng, J., Dong, W., Socher, R., Li, L.-J., & Li, F.-F. (2009). (2009) ImageNet: A large-scale hierarchical
image database. IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2009, 248–255.
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1109/​CVPR.​2009.​52068​48
Department of Defense. (2018) Summary of the 2018 Department of Defense Artificial Intelligence Strategy: Harnessing AI to Advance our Security and Prosperity. https://​media.​defen​se.​gov/​2019/​Feb/​
12/​20020​88963/-​1/-1/​1/​SUMMA​RY-​OF-​DOD-​AI-​STRAT​EGY.​PDF. Accessed 18 Oct 2022
Department of Defense. (2019) Campaign for an AI Ready Force. https://​media.​defen​se.​gov/​2019/​Oct/​31/​
20022​04191/-​1/-1/​0/​CAMPA​IGN_​FOR_​AN_​AI_​READY_​FORCE.​PDF. Accessed 18 Oct 2022
Diakopoulos, N., & Johnson, D. (2021). Anticipating and addressing the ethical implications of deepfakes
in the context of elections. New Media & Society, 23(7), 2072–2098. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1177/​14614​
44820​925811
Druga, S. (2018a). Growing up with AI: Cognimates: from coding to teaching machines. M.Eng thesis, Elect. Eng. Comput. Sci., Massachusetts Inst. of Technol., Cambridge, 2018a. Retrieved from
https://​stefa​nia11.​github.​io/​assets/​pdf/​MIT_​Thesis_​Growin_​up_​with_​AI_​Stefa​nia_​Druga_​2018.​
pdf. Accessed 18 Oct 2022
Druga, S. (2018b). Cognimates [Online Web Application]. Retrieved from http://​cogni​mates.​me/​
home/. Accessed 18 Oct 2022
Druga, S., Williams, R., Breazeal, C., & Resnick, M. (2017). Hey Google is it OK if I eat you?: Initial Explorations in Child-Agent Interaction. Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on Interaction
Design and Children (pp. 595–600). https://​doi.​org/​10.​1145/​30780​72.​30843​30
Dumoulin, V., Shlens, J., and Kudlur, M. (2017) A learned representation for artistic style. International
Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) 2017. https://​doi.​org/​10.​48550/​arXiv.​1610.​07629
Florida Department of Education. (2022). Artificial Intelligence (AI) Foundations High School CTE Curriculum Framework. Retrieved from https://​www.​fldoe.​org/​acade​mics/​career-​adult-​edu/​career-​tech-​
edu/​curri​culum-​frame​works/​2022-​23-​frame​works/​engin​eering-​techn​ology-​edu.​stml. Accessed 18
Oct 2022
Gartner. (2020). Future-Proof Your Talent Strategy: How Artificial Intelligence (AI) is evolving the
workforce. https://​www.​gartn​er.​com/​en/​human-​resou​rces/​resea​rch/​talen​tneur​on/​future-​proof-​your-​
talent-​strat​egy. Accessed 18 Oct 2022
Georgia Department of Education. (2021). Artificial Intelligence High School CTAE Curriculum Frameworks. Retrieved from https://​www.​gadoe.​org/​Curri​culum-​Instr​uction-​and-​Asses​sment/​CTAE/​
Pages/​clust​er-​IT.​aspx. Accessed 18 Oct 2022
Google, Inc. (2022). AI experiments. https://​exper​iments.​withg​oogle.​com/​colle​ction/​ai

13

International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education
Gresse Von Wangenheim, C. G., Hauck, J. C. R., Pacheco, F. E., and Bertonceli Bueno, M. F. (2021).
Visual tools for teaching machine learning in K-12: A ten-year systematic mapping. Education and
Information Technologies, April 2021. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​s10639-​021-​10570-8. Accessed 18
Oct 2022
Grover, S., & Pea, R. (2013). Using a discourse-intensive pedagogy and Android’s app inventor for introducing computational concepts to middle school students. In Proceedings of the 44th ACM Technical Symposium on Computer Science Education (pp. 723–728). https://​doi.​org/​10.​1145/​24451​96.​
24454​04
Hasse, A., Cortesi, S., Lombana, A., & Gasser, U. (2019). Youth and artificial intelligence: Where we
stand. Berkman Klein Center Research Publication, 20193. https://​dash.​harva​rd.​edu/​handle/​1/​
40268​058
Heinze, C.A., Haase, J., and Higgins, H. (2010). An Action Research Report from a Multi-Year Approach
to Teaching Artificial Intelligence at the K-6 Level. Proceedings of the First AAAI Symposium on
Educational Advances in Artificial Intelligence. AAAI Publications.
Hitron, T., Orlev, Y., Wald, I., Shamir, A., Erel, H., & Zuckerman, O. (2019). (2019) Can children understand machine learning concepts? The effect of uncovering black boxes. CHI, 2019(May), 4–9.
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1145/​32906​05.​33006​45
Hmelo, C. E., Holton, D. L., and Kolodner. J. L. (2000) Designing to learn about complex systems. The
Journal of the Learning Sciences 9, 3(2000), 247–298.
IDSSP Curriculum Team. (2019). Curriculum Frameworks for Introductory Data Science. http://​idssp.​
org/​files/​IDSSP_​Frame​works_1.​0.​pdf. Accessed 18 Oct 2022
IMAGINARY gGmbH. (2021) Reinforcement Learning [Online Web Application]. Retrieved from
https://​imagi​nary.​github.​io/​reinf​orcem​ent-​learn​ing-2/​exhib​it.​html?​lang=​en. Accessed 18 Oct 2022
InferKit, Inc. (2020) Demo - InferKit [Online Web Application]. Accessed at https://​app.​infer​kit.​com/​
demo.
Isola, P. Zhu, J.-Y., Zhou, T., and Efros, A. A. (2017) Image-to-image translation with conditional adversarial networks. Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) 2017. https://​doi.​org/​10.​48550/​
arXiv.​1611.​07004
Jewell, C. (2019) Artificial Intelligence: the new electricity. WIPO Magazine, issue 3 (June), [Online].
Available: https://​www.​wipo.​int/​wipo_​magaz​ine/​en/​2019/​03/​artic​le_​0001.​html. Accessed 18 Oct
2022
K–12 Computer Science Framework. (2016). Retrieved from http://​www.​k12cs.​org. Accessed 18 Oct
2022
Kafai, Y. B., & Resnick, M. (1996). Constructionism in practice: Designing, thinking, and learning in a
digital world. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. https://​doi.​org/​10.​4324/​97802​03053​492
Kahn, K., Lu, Y., Zhang, J., Winters, N., & Gao, M. (2020a). Deep Learning Programming by All. Proceedings of Constructionism Conference 2020a, Dublin, Ireland.
Kahn, K., Lu, Y., Zhang, J., Winters, N., & Gao, M. (2020b). Programming word embeddings in Snap!
Retrieved from https://​ecraf​t2lea​rn.​github.​io/​ai/​publi​catio​ns/​Progr​amming%​20word%​20emb​eddin​
gs%​20in%​20Snap.​pdf. Accessed 18 Oct 2022
Kahn, K., Prasad, R., & Veera, G. (2022). AI Snap! Blocks for Speech Input and Output, Computer
Vision, Word Embeddings, and Neural Net Creation, Training, and Use. Proceedings of the AAAI
Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 36(11), 12861–12861. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1609/​aaai.​v36i11.​
21568
Karpathy, A. (2015). GridWorld: Dynamic Programming Demo (REINFORCEjs) [Online Web Application] - Retrieved from https://​cs.​stanf​ord.​edu/​people/​karpa​thy/​reinf​orcejs/​gridw​orld_​dp.​
html. Accessed 18 Oct 2022
Kirkpatrick, K. (2016). Battling algorithmic bias: How do we ensure algorithms treat us fairly? Communications of the ACM, 59(10), 1617.
Kolodner, J. L., Crismond, D., Gray, J., Holbrook, J., and Puntambekar, S. (1998). Learning by design
from theory to practice. In Proceedings of the international conference of the learning sciences,
Vol. 98. 16–22.
Lane, D. (2021a). Machine Learning for Kids: A Project-Based Introduction to Artificial Intelligence. No
Starch Press.
Lane, D. (2021b). Quiz show. Student worksheet from the collection at MachineLearningforKids.
Accessed at https://​machi​nelea​rning​forki​ds.​co.​uk/#​!/​works​heets. Accessed 18 Oct 2022

13

International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education
Lao, N. (2020) Reorienting machine learning education towards tinkerers and ML-engaged citizens. Doctoral thesis, Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Cambridge, MA. https://​dspace.​mit.​edu/​handle/​
1721.1/​129264. Accessed 18 Oct 2022
LeCun, Y., Cortes, C., and Burges, C. J. C. (2021). The MNIST database of handwritten digits. Available
at http://​yann.​lecun.​com/​exdb/​mnist/. Accessed May 16, 2021.
Lehrer, R., & Schauble, L. (2006). Cultivating Model-Based Reasoning in Science Education. In R. K.
Sawyer (Ed.), The Cambridge handbook of: The learning sciences (pp. 371–387). Cambridge University Press.
Lin, T. Y., Maire, M., Belongie, S., Hays, J., Perona, P., Ramanan, D., Dollár, P., and Zitnick, C. L. (2014)
Microsoft COCO: Common Objects in Context. In: Fleet D., Pajdla T., Schiele B., Tuytelaars T.
(eds) Computer Vision – ECCV 2014. ECCV 2014. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol 8693.
Springer. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​978-3-​319-​10602-1_​48.
Linn, M. C. (2000). Designing the Knowledge Integration Environment. International Journal of Science
Education, 22(8), 781–796. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1080/​09500​69004​12275
MacLaurin, M. (2011). The Design of Kodu: A tiny visual programming language for children on the
Xbox 360. In Proceedings of the 38th Annual ACM SIGPLAN-SIGACT Symposium on Principles
of Programming Languages, POPL ’11 (Austin, Jan. 26–28). ACM Press, 2011, 241–245.
Makwana, J., Wolff, M., Ratin, B., and Touretzky, D. S., (2022). Face Demo - TinyYoloV2 Face Detection
[Online Web Application]. Retrieved From https://​www.​cs.​cmu.​edu/​~dst/​FaceD​emo/. Accessed 18
Oct 2022
McStay, A. (2020). Emotional AI, soft biometrics and the surveillance of emotional life: An unusual consensus on privacy. Big Data & Society. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1177/​20539​51720​904386
National Governors Association Center for Best Practices & Council of Chief State School Officers.
(2010a). Common Core State Standards (RI 3.3). Washington, DC http://​www.​cores​tanda​rds.​org/​
ELA-​Liter​acy/​RI/3/. Accessed 18 Oct 2022
National Governors Association Center for Best Practices & Council of Chief State School Officers.
(2010b). Common Core State Standards (W 3.2). Washington, DC http://​www.​cores​tanda​rds.​org/​
ELA-​Liter​acy/W/​3/. Accessed 18 Oct 2022
National Governors Association Center for Best Practices & Council of Chief State School Officers.
(2010c). Common Core State Standards (SL 3.4). Washington, DC http://​www.​cores​tanda​rds.​org/​
ELA-​Liter​acy/​SL/3/. Accessed 18 Oct 2022
National Research Council. (2012). A Framework for K-12 Science Education: Practices, Crosscutting
Concepts, and Core Ideas. Committee on a Conceptual Framework for New K-12 Science Education Standards. Board on Science Education, Division of Behavioral and Social Sciences and Education. The National Academies Press.
National Research Council. (2013a) Appendix F:Science and Engineering Practices in the Next Generation Science Standards. In the Next Generation Science Standards: For States, by States. The
National Academies Press. https://​doi.​org/​10.​17226/​18290. https://​www.​nap.​edu/​read/​18290/​chapt​
er/​12. Accessed 18 Oct 2022
National Research Council. (2013b). Appendix G: Crosscutting concepts in the next generation science
standards. In the next generation science standards: For States, by States. The National Academies
Press. https://​doi.​org/​10.​17226/​18290. https://​www.​nap.​edu/​read/​18290/​chapt​er/​13. Accessed 18
Oct 2022
Norooz, L., Clegg, T. L., Kang, S., Plane, A. C., Oguamanam, V., & Froehlich, J. E. (2016). “That’s
your heart!”: Live Physiological Sensing & Visualization Tools for Life-Relevant & Collaborative
STEM Learning. International Society of the Learning Sciences.
NSTA. (2014). NGSS - Matrix of Cross Cutting Concepts. National Science Teaching Association. Downloaded from https://​static.​nsta.​org/​ngss/​Matri​xOfCr​osscu​tting​Conce​pts.​pdf. Accessed 18 Oct 2022
Pang, N. (2022) Computational Action in Action: Process and Tools that Empower Students to Make a
Real-world Impact Using Technology, M.Eng thesis, Elect. Eng. Comput. Sci., Massachusetts Inst.
of Technol., Cambridge, 2022. Retreived from http://​appin​ventor.​mit.​edu/​assets/​files/​Nicol​ePang_​
MEng_​Thesis.​pdf. Accessed 18 Oct 2022
Papavlasopoulou, S., Giannakos, M. N., & Jaccheri, L. (2019). Exploring children’s learning experience
in constructionism-based coding activities through design-based research. Computers in Human
Behavior, 99, 415–427. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​chb.​2019.​01.​008. Accessed 18 Oct 2022
Petersen, D., Goode, K., and Gehlhaus, D. (2021) AI Education in China and the United States: A Comparative Assessment. Center for Security and Emerging Technology, Georgetown University.
https://​doi.​org/​10.​51593/​20210​005.

13

International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education
Phillips, K. (2019) Teachable Machine 2.0 makes AI easier for everyone. Google AI blog, November 7,
2019. https://​blog.​google/​techn​ology/​ai/​teach​able-​machi​ne/. Accessed 18 Oct 2022
Qiang, Y. and Chao, W. (2018) "The Fourth Revolution," The UNESCO Courier, no. 3, [Online]. Available: https://​en.​unesco.​org/​couri​er/​2018-3/​fourth-​revol​ution. Accessed 18 Oct 2022
Rand, W. & Wilensky, U. (2008). NetLogo Simple Machine Learning model. Center for Connected
Learning and Computer-Based Modeling, Northwestern Institute on Complex Systems, Northwestern University. http://​ccl.​north​weste​rn.​edu/​netlo​go/​models/​Simpl​eMach​ineLe​arning. Accessed 18
Oct 2022
Resnick, M., Silverman, B. (2005). Some reflections on designing construction kits for kids. In Proceedings of the 2005 Conference on Interaction Design and Children (pp. 117–122). Association for
Computing Machinery. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1145/​11095​40.​11095​56
Resnick, M., Berg, R., & Eisenberg, M. (2000). (2000) Beyond black boxes: Bringing transparency and
aesthetics back to scientific investigation. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 9(1), 7–30.
Rini, Regina (2020). Deepfakes and the Epistemic Backstop. Philosophers’ Imprint 20 (24):1–16. Available on PhilArchive: https://​phila​rchive.​org/​archi​ve/​RINDAT. Accessed 18 Oct 2022
Saharia, C., Chan, W., Saxena, S., Li, L., Whang, J., Denton, E., Ghasemipour, S. K. S., Ayan, B. K.,
Mahdavi, S. S., Lopes, R. G., Salimans, T., Ho, J., Fleet, D. J., and Norouzi, M. (2022) Photorealistic text-to-image diffusion models with deep language understanding. https://​doi.​org/​10.​48550/​
arxiv.​2205.​11487.
Samuel, A. (1959) Some studies in machine learning using the game of checkers. IBM Journal of
Research and Development, 3(3), 210–229. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.368.2254. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1147/​rd.​
33.​0210.
SAS Institute. (2018). Artificial Intelligence for Executives. https://​www.​sas.​com/​conte​nt/​dam/​SAS/​en_​
us/​doc/​white​paper1/​artif​i cial-​intel​ligen​ce-​for-​execu​tives-​109066.​pdf. Accessed 18 Oct 2022
Sato, K. (2016). Understanding neural networks with TensorFlow Playground. July 26, 2016. Retrieved
from https://​cloud.​google.​com/​blog/​produ​cts/​ai-​machi​ne-​learn​ing/​under​stand​ing-​neural-​netwo​rks-​
with-​tenso​rflow-​playg​round. Accessed 18 Oct 2022
Scratch Team. (2021a). Face Sensing. https://​lab.​scrat​ch.​mit.​edu/​face/
Scratch Team. (2021b). Exploring a creative, safe introduction to machine learning. https://​medium.​com/​
scrat​chteam-​blog/​explo​ring-a-​creat​ive-​safei​ntrod​uction-​to-​machi​ne-​learn​ing-​c42f1​d0133​e7
Selbst, A. D. (2017a) Disparate Impact in Big Data Policing . 52 Georgia Law Review 109 (February
25, 2017a), Available at SSRN: https://​ssrn.​com/​abstr​act=​28191​82 or https://​doi.​org/​10.​2139/​ssrn.​
28191​82. Accessed 18 Oct 2022
Shachar, C., Gerke, S., & Adashi, E. Y. (2020). AI surveillance during pandemics: Ethical implementation imperatives. Hastings Center Report, 50(3), 18–21.
Selbst, A. D. (2017b). Disparate impact in big data policing. The Georgia Law Review, 52, 109.
Smilkov, D., and Carter, S. (2016). TensorFlow Playground [Online Web Application]. Retrieved from
https://​playg​round.​tenso​rflow.​org. Accessed 18 Oct 2022
Touretzky, D. S. (2017) Computational thinking and mental models: From Kodu to Calypso. 2017 IEEE
Blocks and Beyond Workshop (B&B), Raleigh, NC. October 9–10, 2017. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1109/​
BLOCKS.​2017.​81204​16.
Touretzky, D. S. (2018). Developing K-12 Education Guidelines for Artificial Intelligence. National Science Foundation ITEST Award DRL-1846073. https://​www.​nsf.​gov/​award​search/​showA​ward?​
AWD_​ID=​18460​73. Accessed 18 Oct 2022
Touretzky, D. S., Gardner-McCune, C., Martin, F., and Seehorn, D. (2019a) Envisioning AI for K-12:
What should every child know about AI? Proceedings of AAAI-19. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1609/​aaai.​
v33i01.​33019​795.
Touretzky, D. S., Gardner-McCune, C., Martin, F., & Seehorn, D. (2019b). K-12 Guidelines for Artificial
Intelligence: What Students Should Know, session at ISTE 2019 (June 23–26, 2019, in Philadelphia, PA). https://​ai4k12.​org/​news/​prese​ntati​ons-​and-​papers/
Touretzky, D. S., Gardner-McCune, C., Breazeal, C., Martin, F., & Seehorn, D. (2019c). A year in K-12
AI education. AI Magazine, 40(4), 88–90, Winter 2019. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1609/​aimag.​v40i4.​5289
Turbak, F., Sherman, M., Martin, F., Wolber, D. and Crawford Pokress, S. (2014) Events-first programming in App Inventor. Journal of Computing Sciences in Colleges, 29(6), 81–89.
UNESCO. (2022). K-12 AI Curricula: A mapping of government-endorsed AI curricula. Available online
at https://​unesd​oc.​unesco.​org/​ark:/​48223/​pf000​03806​02. Accessed 18 Oct 2022
Universidad da Coruña. (2019) AI+: Developing an Artificial Intelligence curriculum adapted to European high schools. https://​aiplus.​udc.​es/. Accessed 18 Oct 2022

13

International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education
van Brakel, R. (2016) Pre-Emptive Big Data Surveillance and its (Dis)Empowering Consequences: The
Case of Predictive Policing. In B. van der Sloot, D. Broeders, & E. Schrijvers (Eds.), Exploring the
Boundaries of Big Data. Amsterdam University Press, pp. 117–141. Available at SSRN: https://​
ssrn.​com/​abstr​act=​27724​69 or https://​doi.​org/​10.​2139/​ssrn.​27724​69. Accessed 18 Oct 2022
Van Brummelen, J., Heng, T., & Tabunshchyk, V. (2021). Teaching tech to talk: K-12 conversational
artificial intelligence literacy curriculum and development tools. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (Vol. 35, No. 17, pp. 15655–15663). https://​doi.​org/​10.​1609/​aaai.​
v35i17.​17844
Wang, J., Turko, R., Shaikh, O., Park, H., Das, N., Hohman, F., Kahng, M., and Chau, P. (2020). CNN
Explainer [Online Web Application]. Developed Retrieved from https://​poloc​lub.​github.​io/​cnn-​
expla​iner/. Accessed 18 Oct 2022
Wang, Z. J., Turko, R., Shaikh, O., Park, H., Das, N., Hohman, F., Kahng, M., & Chau, D. (2021). CNN
Explainer: Learning Convolutional Neural Networks with Interactive Visualization. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, 27, 1396–1406.
Wikipedia. (2021). “Machine learning.” See footnote 2, suggesting that the phrase “without being explicitly programmed” may be a paraphrase of what Arthur Samuel actually said. https://​en.​wikip​edia.​
org/​wiki/​Machi​ne_​learn​ing, accessed May 5, 2021.
Wilensky, U., & Rand, W. (2015). An introduction to agent-based modeling: Modeling natural, social,
and engineered complex systems with netLogo. MIT Press.
Wilkerson, M. H., Sengupta, P., & Wilensky, U. (2008). Perceptual supports for sensemaking: a case
study using multi agent based computational learning environments. In Proceedings of the 8th
International Conference on International Conference for the Learning Sciences (Vol. 3, pp. 151–
152). https://​repos​itory.​isls.​org/​bitst​ream/1/​3232/1/​151-​152.​pdf
Zhang, H., Lee, I., Ali, S., DiPaola, D., Cheng, Y., & Breazeal, C. (2022). Integrating ethics and career
futures with technical learning to promote AI literacy for middle school students: An exploratory study. International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​
s40593-​022-​00293-3
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps
and institutional affiliations.
Springer Nature or its licensor (e.g. a society or other partner) holds exclusive rights to this article under
a publishing agreement with the author(s) or other rightsholder(s); author self-archiving of the accepted
manuscript version of this article is solely governed by the terms of such publishing agreement and
applicable law.

13

