ORIGINAL RESEARCH
published: 17 June 2022
doi: 10.3389/feduc.2022.913530

Learn to Machine Learn via Games in
the Classroom
Marvin Zammit*, Iro Voulgari, Antonios Liapis and Georgios N. Yannakakis
Institute of Digital Games, University of Malta, Msida, Malta

Edited by:
Iza Marfisi-Schottman,
EA4023 Laboratoire d’Informatique de
l’Université du Mans (LIUM), France
Reviewed by:
Samia Bachir,
Le Mans Université, France
Michael Kickmeier-Rust,
University of Teacher Education St.
Gallen, Switzerland
*Correspondence:
Marvin Zammit
marvin.zammit@um.edu.mt
Specialty section:
This article was submitted to
Digital Learning Innovations,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Education
Received: 05 April 2022
Accepted: 20 May 2022
Published: 17 June 2022
Citation:
Zammit M, Voulgari I, Liapis A and
Yannakakis GN (2022) Learn to
Machine Learn via Games in the
Classroom. Front. Educ. 7:913530.
doi: 10.3389/feduc.2022.913530

Frontiers in Education | www.frontiersin.org

Artificial Intelligence (AI) and Machine Learning (ML) algorithms are increasingly being
adopted to create and filter online digital content viewed by audiences from diverse
demographics. From an early age, children grow into habitual use of online services
but are usually unaware of how such algorithms operate, or even of their presence.
Design decisions and biases inherent in the ML algorithms or in the datasets they
are trained on shape the everyday digital lives of present and future generations. It
is therefore important to disseminate a general understanding of AI and ML, and the
ethical concerns associated with their use. As a response, the digital game ArtBot
was designed and developed to teach fundamental principles about AI and ML, and
to promote critical thinking about their functionality and shortcomings in everyday digital
life. The game is intended as a learning tool in primary and secondary school classrooms.
To assess the effectiveness of the ArtBot game as a learning experience we collected
data from over 2,000 players across different platforms focusing on the degree of usage,
interface efficiency, learners’ performance and user experience. The quantitative usage
data collected within the game was complemented by over 160 survey responses from
teachers and students during early pilots of ArtBot. The evaluation analysis performed in
this paper gauges the usability and usefulness of the game, and identifies areas of the
game design which need improvement.
Keywords: machine learning, artificial intelligence, serious games, educational games, game analytics, digital
literacy, supervised learning, reinforcement learning

1. INTRODUCTION
Through the use of the world-wide web and access to applications such as social media, games,
Google search, YouTube, and the Internet of Things, digital technologies are mediating children’s
learning, entertainment and social interactions, and are shaping their everyday lives (Rahwan et al.,
2019). The online environment has become ubiquitous, and artificial intelligence (AI) and machine
learning (ML) algorithms are employed across most digital platforms to track user preferences,
suggest content, and even generate novel material for a wide variety of purposes (Yannakakis
and Togelius, 2018). This pervasiveness can enhance the user experience but is fraught with
controversy, as user data is often stored and possibly shared with third parties without clarity to the
user. This may lead to breach of personal information, or more nefarious acts such as steering of
public opinion or distortion of facts. Despite the implications of such digital technologies, children’s
conceptions of technology, its potential and implications may be vague, inaccurate or distorted
(Druga et al., 2017; Mertala, 2019). It is therefore crucial—especially for the younger generations—
to understand how AI is used, how it works, and what its pitfalls are. Critical thinking skills, such as
making inferences, decision-making, and problem solving (Lai, 2011) have to be promoted. This is
necessary for children to understand the implications and context of the online content they access,
to recognize the use of AI and how it encroaches into their daily life and their social environment.

1

June 2022 | Volume 7 | Article 913530

Zammit et al.

Learn to Machine Learn

Robocode, respectively, introduced games for teaching AI
algorithms to undergraduate computer science students. What
has shifted, though, over the past few years is the framing
of AI education through games and the age of the target
group. Building upon the potential of games to support systems
thinking, computational thinking, and understanding of complex
concepts and processes (Clark et al., 2009; Voulgari, 2020),
platforms, games, and applications to support AI literacy have
been developed for learners as young as 4 years old, addressing
the technical, societal, and ethical aspects of AI (Giannakos et al.,
2020; Zammit et al., 2021).
Games, such as the commercial game While True: Learn()2
and ViPER (Parker and Becker, 2014) are appropriate for younger
students and aim to scaffold the players through understanding
ML concepts such as optimization, loops, and model accuracy.
In While True: Learn() players assume the role of a computer
programmer who tries to develop a model for communicating
with their cat and complete tasks using visual programming,
while in ViPER players train a robot, through coding, to navigate
its way on one of Jupiter’s moons. Another commercial game,
Human Resource Machine3 , which introduces the players to
concepts such as automation and optimization by programming
the employees in an office environment, has been adapted
for students and teachers in educational contexts such as
participation in the Hour of Code.4
Available platforms and tools allow learners to build their own
ML models (engaging them in exploratory and constructivist
learning practices) and to situate the models in the context of
their own interests or real-world problems. Google Teachable
Machine (GTM), for instance, has been used by 12–13 years old
students, introducing them to ML concepts through the design
of their own ML models, relevant to their interests or realworld problems (Toivonen et al., 2020; Vartiainen et al., 2021).
Results have shown that GTM is appropriate for students with
little or no programming experience. Situated in an appropriate
learning context, activities through GTM allowed the students
to exhibit design thinking, reason inductively about the quality
of the datasets and the accuracy of their models, and show
empathy to other people’s needs in order to develop appropriate
ML applications. Zimmermann-Niefield et al. (2019), using a tool
they developed (AlpacaML), also engaged high school students
in the design of their own ML models based on their own
interest (i.e., athletic activities). The students experimented with
the design of their models and reflected upon the characteristics
of a good model and how the models work.
Approaches such as those of Turchi et al. (2019) and
Microsoft’s Minecraft. Hour of Code: AI for Good5 also situate
AI and ML into real-world problems. Turchi et al. (2019) used
a combination of online and board game play to introduce AI
concepts to students and professionals involving the protection
of wildlife, while Minecraft. Hour of Code: AI for Good scaffolds

The work presented in this paper is situated in this context;
we present ArtBot, a game that aims to provide young learners
with the background knowledge of basic concepts behind AI
and ML, and to show how basic algorithms can be used to
solve different problems. In addition, we aim to highlight the
challenges emerging from AI, thereby exposing students to
the capabilities and limitations of these algorithms. Extensive
research over the past few decades has shown the effectiveness
and potential of digital games as learning tools; games may
support motivation, engagement, and active participation of
learners, enhance attention, involvement, and understanding of
abstract and complex concepts (Hainey et al., 2016; Tsai and Tsai,
2020). Our game, ArtBot, builds upon this potential of games
and aims to introduce young learners to the two fundamental
processes of ML: supervised learning (SL) and reinforcement
learning (RL). ArtBot was developed to be a teaching tool in
classrooms to raise awareness and critical thinking about AI
processes. The game was made available primarily through web
browsers1 , but also for download on Windows operating systems,
and as a mobile app on Android devices through the Google
Play store. ArtBot comprises of two mini-games, one containing
a level dedicated to SL, and the other consisting of ten levels
dedicated to RL. The game narrative has the players tasked with
retrieving art objects which have gone missing. The player is
assisted by an AI helper (ArtBot) which they must train first
to distinguish between statues and paintings, then to navigate
rooms to collect statues scattered within them, avoid hazards
and reach the exit. The game offers players customization of the
avatar depicting ArtBot from a set of predefined models and
color schemes.
ArtBot has been deployed on all platforms concurrently in
April 2021, and included the collection of anonymous usage
metrics. In our past publications (Voulgari et al., 2021; Zammit
et al., 2021), we have focused on the educational design of ArtBot,
how the requirements which emerged through focus groups with
stakeholders were translated and adapted into a practical game
design, and its implementation, deployment and initial reception.
This paper, instead, explores the longitudinal usage of the ArtBot
game in real-world settings over a period of almost 1 year.
Since its deployment to the general public, the game has been
played by over 2,000 unique users across all platforms. This has
supplied us with a substantial body of interaction data to analyse
the game objectively, and draw conclusions about its design and
interface based on user behavior. In this paper we review this
data and try to obtain practical insights that expose the strengths
and weaknesses of the game, and to evaluate whether the players’
interaction with the game followed patterns intended by the
design process.

2. GAMES FOR AI LITERACY
Using games for teaching AI is not an entirely new concept.
Initiatives such as those of Clarke and Noriega (2003) and
Hartness (2004), which involved a war simulation game and

2 https://luden.io/wtl/
3 https://tomorrowcorporation.com/humanresourcemachine
4 https://tomorrowcorporation.com/human-resource-machine-hour-of-codeedition
5 https://education.minecraft.net/hour-of-code

1 Initially launched at http://learnml.eu/games.php and later moved to a dedicated

website at http://art-bot.net/ on 22 March 2022.

Frontiers in Education | www.frontiersin.org

2

June 2022 | Volume 7 | Article 913530

Zammit et al.

Learn to Machine Learn

• To introduce reinforcement learning and related concepts,
such as rewards and penalties, learning rate, exploration,
exploitation, and pathfinding.
• To show that the design decisions behind the implementation
of an AI system have a considerable bearing on its behavior
and outputs, thereby highlighting the fact that human bias may
seep through the workings of the algorithms.
• To provoke reflection and discussions on the impact of AI
systems in everyday life situations e.g., facial recognition,
self-driving vehicles, etc.

players to programme a robot to predict forest fires. Through
such approaches learners may not only be introduced to concepts
of AI and ML but also understand the role, potential, and impact
of AI and ML applications in authentic and meaningful contexts.
Existing platforms, games, and applications seem to either
provide an open-ended environment for learners to experiment,
design and develop their own models applying concepts of AI
and ML, or scaffold learners through a linear sequence of puzzles,
to become familiar with AI and ML functions, processes, and
algorithms (Voulgari et al., 2021). While the latter approach may
facilitate novice students to understand basic principles of AI
and ML algorithms, the open-ended approach allows students to
engage in problem-solving tasks, reflect on their actions, assess
and re-examine their progress and construct their knowledge
by assuming a more active role, in line with constructivist and
constructionist approaches (Kafai and Burke, 2015). In our game
design, we tried to combine elements from both approaches; by
guiding the players through linear tasks we aimed to introduce
learners to core concepts of AI and ML, and through the
more open-ended tasks, we provided space for experimentation,
problem-solving, and reflection.

With these objectives in mind, two mini-games were developed
within ArtBot, focusing on supervised learning (SL) and
reinforcement learning (RL), respectively. Specifically, regarding
SL, concepts such as training set, testing set, data labeling,
classification. and decision trees were introduced. For RL, we
focused on introducing concepts such as rewards, learning rate,
and exploration. The premise of the game was that a number
of statues have gone missing, and the players are tasked with
their retrieval. To assist in their quest, the players are given
an autonomous helper (ArtBot). We tried to set the story
in a meaningful narrative background since narrative seems
to motivate the students, support understanding of abstract
concepts and the construction of mental models, and re-frame
the activities and challenges of the game into an authentic context
(Glaser et al., 2009). ArtBot must first be trained to distinguish
between statues and paintings, before it can be sent to retrieve the
missing statues. Therefore, the SL mini-game is played first, and
once completed the RL mini-game becomes available; in general,
players need to complete the previous mini-game or level in order
to proceed to the next one. Each mini-game is described below,
while more details on the design, interfaces, and algorithms
included in ArtBot are provided by Zammit et al. (2021).

3. LEARNML AND ARTBOT
LearnML (or Learn to Machine Learn)6 is a European-funded
project aiming to develop digital literacy and awareness of AI
usage in the digital landscape to learners who are exposed to these
technologies from an early age. Its goal is to develop a toolkit for
teachers and students which can be used primarily in a classroom
environment, but also in non-formal learning settings (e.g., at
home). The project involved the development of a number of
educational games which teach different aspects of ML. These are
supported by teaching materials that supplement the experience
through classroom discussions to encourage reflection and
critical thinking. A number of workshops and events for teachers
and students were also organized in order to disseminate the
work done and also gauge feedback directly from stakeholders
(Voulgari et al., 2021). The impact on students, teachers, and
their needs was always a priority during the development of
ArtBot, which was part of the LearnML project and shared
its broader goals. ArtBot was designed in collaboration with
educators, with requirements collected through participatory
design workshops held in three countries (Greece, Malta, and
Norway) and included participation of all stakeholder categories:
e.g., teachers, students, and AI researchers (Zammit et al., 2021).
The goals of ArtBot were distilled from the stakeholder needs
and consisted of the following (Voulgari et al., 2021):

3.1. Description of the Supervised Learning
Mini-Game
Supervised learning (SL) is an umbrella term for ML algorithms
which are used when a considerable amount of data pertaining to
the problem is available (Zhou and Liu, 2021). SL is commonly
applied to classification problems. An existing set of labeled data
is processed through the algorithm, which tries to find some
complex function that accommodates the majority of points. The
available data is usually split into a training set, which is used to
teach the model, and a testing set, which is used to verify the
accuracy of the trained model on unseen data. Some inherent
problems with SL are that data labeling is a laborious process,
and that the data itself may be biased, or even incorrect, leading
to this bias being learned by the model itself.
The SL mini-game tasks players to label a number of images
of paintings and statues; after the labeling process is complete,
ArtBot uses a decision tree based on the supplied labels to classify
hitherto unseen images. All images were obtained from the Open
Access Artworks7 collection of the Metropolitan Museum of
Art in New York, USA, and are photographs of real paintings
and statues.

• To introduce the process of supervised learning, including
terminology and concepts of training and testing datasets,
classification, labeling, image recognition, decision trees, and
prediction accuracy, and outline their role and behavior in an
AI system.

6 http://learnml.eu/

Frontiers in Education | www.frontiersin.org

7 https://www.metmuseum.org

3

June 2022 | Volume 7 | Article 913530

Zammit et al.

Learn to Machine Learn

FIGURE 1 | Screenshots of ArtBot, showing (in order) the SL mini-game settings (top left) and the resulting classification (top right) screens. The RL mini-game offers
two sets of settings to the players: rewards and penalties of the various objects (bottom left), and RL parameters (bottom right).

3.2. Description of the Reinforcement
Learning Mini-Game

Players are allowed to assign incorrect labels, experiment,
and see how this affects ArtBot’s learned classification skills.
The classification was simplified to a left swipe (to label an
image as painting) or right swipe (to label it as statue) in
order to speed up the process. However, this is an inherently
repetitive task and can rapidly get boring. To mitigate this, we
limited the classification task to 20 images, and also provided
an auto-sort button which assigns the ground truth label to each
image automatically.
In order to decrease the computational resources required
to process and group the dataset images, the SL algorithm
splits the pixel spectrum into a smaller number of colors which
is controlled by the players. A decision tree is then trained
on the training set that has been labeled by the player using
the C4.5 algorithm (Quinlan, 1992), and used to classify the
image as a painting or statue depending on the pixel count
in each of the resulting color bins. The player is also given
control on the maximum allowed depth of the decision tree.
The interface for this mini-game is shown in Figure 1. Note
that when showing the player the results of the SL mini-game,
the training accuracy is shown as well as a testing accuracy
on a set of 20 images that are unseen by both the players
and the decision tree, and have been labeled correctly by the
game’s designers. This training and testing accuracy introduces
learners to the concept of training and test sets, and illustrates
how supervised learning can be used to predict patterns in
unseen data but can suffer from overfitting to patterns in the
training data.

Frontiers in Education | www.frontiersin.org

Reinforcement Learning (RL) is applied when the problem at
hand requires a policy or a behavior which will generate the
expected solution (Sutton and Barto, 2018). In such cases, there is
generally either no predefined dataset available, or the problem is
incongruous with a structured one. The learning process starts
with a random policy (i.e., taking actions at random) while
rewards or penalties are awarded for each action. The algorithm
updates its knowledge about the problem according to these
rewards, over a repeated number of trials—or episodes. The
process tries to maximize the rewards obtained by changing its
policy and observe the resulting performance. Some of the issues
with this approach are the lengthy “trial and error” approach,
as well as the challenge of balancing out how much weight
the algorithm should put toward its acquired knowledge vs. the
exploration of yet unknown actions.
In the RL mini-game, the player oversees how the ArtBot can
learn to navigate through 10 different levels, avoiding hazards
(spikes), collecting statues, and finding the exit. Players can set
rewards and penalties to be used in the learning algorithm for
each type of game object. In addition they are given a number
of controls over RL parameters, such as the learning rate, the
balance between exploration of new areas and utilization of
already discovered information, and the total time allowed for
training. When players choose rewards and parameters, the game
will use a basic Q-learning algorithm (Watkins and Dayan, 1992)
to negotiate a path across the level. Initially ArtBot will start

4

June 2022 | Volume 7 | Article 913530

Zammit et al.

Learn to Machine Learn

The language change within the game was also monitored,
and it was noted that 148 users (i.e., in 6.7% of game
starts) switched to Greek, but no user has so far selected
Norwegian. The game was launched in English and Greek,
then updated with Norwegian localization on 2 September
2021, which has some bearing on this resulting lack of
adoption.

taking random steps in the environment and record the resulting
rewards. As more rewards are encountered across the different
episodes, the agent learns an optimal path that maximizes the
total reward.
The players can progress to the next level if the exit is found
and at least one statue is collected. They can however change the
settings and retry each level at will. The user interface for this
mini-game and the corresponding settings available to the players
are shown in Figure 1.

4.2. Collection of User Evaluations via
Surveys

4. DEPLOYMENT AND DATA COLLECTION

Beyond anonymous data collected from log files, an online survey
was also used to examine players’ attitudes toward the game. Two
surveys were designed: one for students (130 participants) and
one for educators (35 participants). Seventy-four percent of the
educators identified as female and 26% as male, while for the
students 51% identified as male, 45% as female, and 4% preferred
not to answer. Mean (M) age of the students was 14.3 years
old, with a standard deviation (SD) of 5. The surveys included
open questions regarding the positive and negative aspects of the
game, and closed questions (5-item Likert scale) on whether they
enjoyed the game and its learning potential. Gaming frequency
varied among students and educators, reporting from 0 to 30 h
of game playing over the past week for students (M = 7.6, SD
= 10.6) and from 0 to 10 h for educators (M = 1.6, SD = 2.6).
The educators came from a wide range of fields such as physics,
language, mathematics, and information technology.
ArtBot was disseminated through the following events and
avenues, where the game was demonstrated to participants, the
participants were asked to play the game for a few minutes, and
then asked to complete an evaluation survey:

ArtBot was developed in the Unity game engine8 due to the
engine’s capabilities to deploy to multiple platforms. We made use
of Unity’s integrated analytics service to collect in-game events
anonymously across all platforms in order to better understand
the performance of the game in terms of adoption, use, and player
experience. ArtBot was deployed on the 8th April 2021 on the
LearnML website9 ; however, it was shown to some focus groups
even earlier as discussed in Section 4.2. The game can be played
directly inside web browsers supporting WebGL technology,
downloaded for Microsoft Windows operating systems, or
downloaded to Android devices from the Google Play Store.10
The game has been localized in English, Greek, and Norwegian
languages, to facilitate a more widespread adoption in the
countries of the LearnML project partners.

4.1. Collection of Game Analytics
The data presented in this document covers a period from the
launch date (8 April 2021) up to 28 February 2022, although data
collection is still ongoing.
Figure 2 shows the total number of distinct users as well as the
monthly active users. Player uniqueness can be ascertained for
the Windows and Android platforms, but web browser sessions
are less identifiable (e.g., anonymous browsing modes in the
web browser client will make different sessions by the same
user appear as different users). However, we assume that this
measurement error is not significant enough, especially since
there is no apparent benefit for the users to obfuscate their
activities in the game. Table 1 shows the distribution of users
across the platforms over which the game was deployed. It is
interesting to note that the majority of the players chose to play
the game through the browser, which indicates that facilitating
immediate launch of the game (as opposed to the download
and installation required on the other platforms) is important
to the end-user. This is particularly relevant as the game is
(also) intended for classroom use, and special privileges are
usually required on public computers for installing new software;
instead, the browser experience is available to all. It is also worth
mentioning that most players that launched the app also initiated
a game, and played at least the first SL mini-game.

• Distributed to secondary education teachers and students of a
private school in Athens, Greece, in March 2021 (before the
official launch).
• Demonstrated during online workshops with primary and
secondary education teachers, mainly in computer science but
also teachers from science education, linguistics and arts, in
the framework of the Athens Science Festival in March 2021.
• Demonstrated during an online seminar mainly for secondary
education teachers, organized by the 3rd Secondary Education
Office in Attica, Greece, in May 2021.
• Demonstrated as part of an online teacher training event,
in June 2021, organized in Malta. Participants were primary
and secondary education teachers from a wide range of fields
such as computer science, mathematics, economics, biology,
Maltese, and ethics/religion, as well as other stakeholders (e.g.,
heads of school, school inspectors, researchers) from state,
private, and church schools.
• Showcased and tested during a 3-day teacher training event for
primary and secondary education teachers in October 2021.
• Showcased during a LearnML Info Day event in October 2021,
mainly addressing educators and researchers.
• Shown as part of a keynote speech at the 3rd International
Conference on Digital Culture & AudioVisual Challenges,
addressing researchers and lecturers from a wide range of
academic fields, in May 2021.

8 https://unity.com
9 http://learnml.eu/games.php
10 https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.InstituteofDigitalGames.

ArtBot

Frontiers in Education | www.frontiersin.org

5

June 2022 | Volume 7 | Article 913530

Zammit et al.

Learn to Machine Learn

FIGURE 2 | Usage statistics showing the total number of unique users and the monthly active users over the data collection period.

Another practical metric for user engagement is the duration
of playtime in each level. This proved to be a challenging measure
to evaluate for the online playable version of the game. We
noticed a number of users with extremely long times spent in
each level (e.g., over an hour), which indicates that the game
was most probably left running unattended in the browser while
the user switched to another activity. Since the browser version
was the most popular platform being used (see Table 1), this
practice introduced a number of outlying data which skewed
the statistics. The overall regular usage, however, was frequent
enough to mitigate this, and we manually removed the outliers
in terms of duration for this analysis.
When considering each level per mini-game, the mean time
spent by the player in each of the levels was 4.2 min, although
there was considerable variation. The SL mini-game and each
level of the RL mini-game had a similar duration (3.8 min on
average for SL, 4.4 for each RL level).
At every portion of the game, information screens were made
available for additional explanation of how to use the game
controls as well as further clarification about the underlying ML
process. This information changed at every phase of the minigame, updating the information with more relevant instructions
and facts related to that specific part. Since the information was
verbose, the display of these screens was entirely optional, and
was displayed at the request of the player. Very few players
opened these informational screens; the data indicates that most
players who opened the information screen only did so during the
first phase of each mini-game. This could be an indication that
it was not clear to them that the content of that screen changed
during subsequent phases. That said, the help options in the RL
mini-game were requested more than two times as often as the
respective help options for the SL mini-game. This indicates that

TABLE 1 | Unique players sorted by platform.
Total users

Browser

Android

Windows

Unique user visits

2,484

2,265

154

65

Unique user game starts

2,222

2,034

131

57

5. DATA ANALYSIS
Since its first launch in April 2021, the ArtBot game has been
played by a total of 2,222 unique users. The users’ interaction data
with the game in general, and its two constituent mini-games
around supervised learning (SL mini-game) and reinforcement
learning (RL mini-game) are analyzed below, while the feedback
of users (students and educators) to surveys solicited during
dedicated events (see Section 4.2) is analyzed in Section 5.4.

5.1. General Use
As a first indication of the engagement of players with the game,
we explore how many unique users interacted with different
portions of the game. Since the game progresses sequentially
from the menu page to the SL mini-game and then to the
RL mini-game (the latter consisting of 10 levels), we observe
how many users visited each portion in Figure 3. The SL game
and the first RL level had a large number of players and a
relatively high completion rate (82 and 74%, respectively), but
the number of players moving on to later levels of the RL game
decreases drastically after that. The completion rate remained
high, indicating that persevering players were still engaged with
the game. However, the high drop in the amount of players might
indicate that the different levels of RL mini-game did not offer
enough novelty to secure player retention.

Frontiers in Education | www.frontiersin.org

6

June 2022 | Volume 7 | Article 913530

Zammit et al.

Learn to Machine Learn

FIGURE 3 | Total number of unique users starting and completing the Supervised Learning level and the Reinforcement Learning levels.

5.2. The Supervised Learning Mini-Game

the many parameters that could be tweaked in the RL sessions
required more explanation than the few and intuitive options for
the SL sessions.
At the beginning of the game the players are given the
option to customize their avatar, selecting between five different
avatars for ArtBot and three different color schemes per
avatar. During the requirements collection stage of the game
development process, it was determined that there exists a
widespread misconception that AI is used mostly in robots.
Consequently, the avatars were intentionally created without any
anthropomorphic or highly technological connotations which
may misconstrue them as being robots (Zammit et al., 2021).
The avatar choices are shown in Figure 4. For ease of reference
throughout this text the avatars are referred to as A1 to A5,
each having three possible color schemes. The default avatar (A1
with the first color scheme) was the most commonly selected
(36% of users). However, customization did occur and all possible
avatar and color variations were chosen by at least 16 users. The
most popular avatars (across all color schemes) were in order:
A1 (54% of users), A2 (19%), A4 (11%), A3 (9%), A5 (7%). The
more abstract avatars (A3, A5) were less commonly picked, while
more anthropomorphic avatars (with bilateral symmetry and a
distinction between front and back) were preferred despite our
efforts to avoid these connotations.

Frontiers in Education | www.frontiersin.org

Due to our concern about the repetitiveness of the manual
labeling process in the SL mini-game, we monitored the
usage rate of the auto-sort function. Auto-sort was used to
label the images automatically in 65% of the games played.
Following the completion of an SL mini-game session, 25%
of players repeated the labeling process, and 32% of players
opted to change the parameters of the algorithm to see how
the learned classification changed. These findings indicate
that although some players were interested enough in the
process to test different settings, the manual labeling activity
was either not enjoyable, or does not yield enough of a
different outcome for the experience to be considered worth the
player’s while.
Another important metric is when players were choosing to
retry the level by changing the settings or relabeling the images.
We noted each player’s retries and what the resulting accuracy of
the testing set was before and after the retry action: 32% of retries
resulted in a greater accuracy, 28% regressed to a worse accuracy
and the remaining 40% showed no change in accuracy. This
suggests that the players were trying to improve their accuracy
score, but the high rate of unvarying accuracy also implies that
the settings we offer in the game might not allow enough room
for improvement.

7

June 2022 | Volume 7 | Article 913530

Zammit et al.

Learn to Machine Learn

FIGURE 4 | The avatars which players can choose to represent ArtBot. In this paper they are referred to as A1 to A5 in sequential order from left to right.

Overall, the large variance of algorithmic settings, accompanied
by the variance in testing accuracy, points to some exploratory
behavior from players in order to improve the behavior of the
SL algorithm.

The accuracy of labeling by the players compared to the
ground truth was usually above 90%, even when ignoring the
high number of auto-sorted runs; almost 99% of users that did
manual labeling had 90% or above labeling accuracy on the
training set. A few users labeled the images (paintings vs. statues)
with lower accuracy, among which 10 unique users classified
all paintings as statues and vice versa. Since the classification
task itself is very easy for a human being, we deduce that this
mislabeling was intentional and exploratory, which was among
our initial objectives. Mislabeling the dataset would be a good
entry point for discussion about the accuracy of trained models
and the role of AI developers and data quality. However, players
did not explore such disruptive labeling strategies which indicates
the need to add prompts for the players to try to mislabel the data
and reflect upon the results. Moreover, since the vast majority
of users classified all images correctly (73% of players who did
manual labeling), this would indicate that the task is trivial, and
why auto-sorting was used to avoid it.
When considering the accuracy of the AI at the end of the
supervised learning process, data shows that accuracy on the
training dataset was very high, as expected (≥90% accuracy in
99% of sessions). The accuracy on a hitherto unseen testing
dataset however, was much lower on average (67% across all
sessions) and varied much more wildly. In 93% of the games
played, the test accuracy was between 50% and 90%, and only
went higher than that in 4% of sessions. Although it is normal
for accuracy to drop during inference on a testing dataset, the
reason why it is so pronounced here is probably the small amount
(20) of labeled images that are used to train the algorithm. We
opted for this small number to strike a good balance between
accuracy and the tedium of the manual labeling task if extended
to larger training datasets. This shortcoming, however, could act
as a trigger for discussion with the learners on the factors affecting
the quality of the trained model. A relevant note has actually been
added at the information panel regarding the relation of the size
of the training set and the accuracy of a model.
An analysis of the algorithmic settings used shows that the full
range was used both for the color bin settings (from 4 to 32 in
steps of 8) as well as for the maximum depth of the decision tree
(1 to 3). The mean number of colors used as inputs to the SL
algorithm was 15.0 across all players, with a standard deviation
of 9.6. The high variance indicates that the color bin settings
was being changed across replays. The tree depth was set to its
maximum allowed value of 3 by 87% of the players, while 7.6%
of players used a tree depth of 2 and 5.1% used a tree depth of 1.

Frontiers in Education | www.frontiersin.org

5.3. The Reinforcement Learning
Mini-Game
The ArtBot mini-game focusing on reinforcement learning (RL)
is richer in content, comprising of ten distinct levels when
compared to the single SL mini-game. It also has a larger set
of RL parameters for the player to explore, and its visuals are
more congruent with those of commercial games. It was thus
foreseeable that the engagement time for this part would be
higher, as discussed in Section 5.1.
This mini-game includes a training time for the AI agent
(between 30 s and 3 min) which can be chosen by the user. The
mean training time set by players varied between 70 and 84 s
across the different levels, with later levels (RL7 to RL10) falling
closer to the upper end of this range. Since the game only allows
training times to be in increments of 30 s, most players chose
shorter training times (60 or 90 s).
Since rewards drive the AI behavior in RL problems, we
observe what rewards and penalties the players assign to different
game objects across the ten levels. Players may assign a reward of
values between 1 and 5 to exits, and between -5 and 5 to hazards
and collectibles. We monitored the mean and standard deviation
of the assigned rewards across the different levels, which yielded
useful insight. The standard deviation was consistently high in
earlier levels of the RL mini-game (RL1 to RL5), indicating
that players were assigning different rewards and penalties to
explore how the learning of the agent is affected. In later levels
(RL6 to RL10) the variance drops, indicating that those players
who made it that far had developed some intuition for the
more optimal assignments of these values. The mean reward for
reaching the exit was consistently between 3.5 and 3.9 across
levels. Players were often not assigning the maximum reward
for the exit, in order to allow the agent to explore and obtain
rewards from collectibles while learning. The mean reward for
reaching collectibles was around 3.5 for the initial levels, then
increased to around 4.3 at later levels. This again confirms more
frequent variations in the settings in the earlier levels than in
later levels, and that collectibles were prioritized over exits in
order to promote collection of more statues in each level. The
mean rewards for reaching hazards followed a reverse pattern,
with negative rewards of −3 at earlier levels, up to −4.2 later in

8

June 2022 | Volume 7 | Article 913530

Zammit et al.

Learn to Machine Learn

shows that players tended to use this function mostly in the first
four levels, then the rate gradually decreased; two exceptions were
RL6 and RL10, which also had a large number of stops. This is
congruent to the previous finding that these two levels were the
most difficult in terms of collecting statues, indicating that the
users were noticing that only one statue was being collected and
stopped the training to revise the settings. In a similar fashion,
levels RL6, RL4, RL10 were the ones in which the players most
frequently changed the settings and retried the learning after the
training was allowed to complete. These results keep underlining
the difficulty in reaching the exit in RL4, and the collectibles of
RL6 and RL10.
Analogously to what was done for the SL mini-game, we
also noted the events leading players to retry the level with
different settings. The occurrences of an improved, identical
or worse performance upon a level retry were counted. Since
the level completion is contingent on the exit being found, an
improved collectible count was only considered in this analysis
when the exit was also reached before and after the repetition.
A newly found exit resulted in 9% of retries, while it was
lost after 6% of retries. It is expected that in most cases this
value would be unchanged since players tended to repeat the
level to get more collectibles. For the latter, 17% of the retries
resulted in more collectibles and 10% of retries resulted in
fewer. It is still noteworthy that 73% of the time the number of
collectibles remained unchanged. This suggests that either the
settings offered to the player might not be providing enough
agency to change this result, or the lack of such affordance is due
to the individual design of each level.

the game. It also indicates an understanding by the players of
the relation between the rewards or penalties assigned and the
behavior of the agent.
We noted a different behavior with respect to the algorithm
parameters. The variation within each RL parameter across
sessions did not change much from level to level. This is
interesting, as we were expecting that players would eventually
find the best parameter setup and keep it consistent at later
levels. The mean learning rate was consistently high throughout
(>0.9), whereas the exploration rate had the highest variance
from level to level, ranging between 76 and 89%. It is reasonable
to set a high learning rate when training time is limited.
Since the players were trying to collect more treasures before
reaching the exit, it also makes sense for the exploration rate
to be an intuitive parameter to vary. This indicates that players
understood the underlying principles of reinforcement learning,
and how human-determined settings have the potential of
varying the outcome of an AI algorithm.
We also logged the results of the final runs after training
is complete, as they offer additional insights to the individual
level design in addition to AI behavior (and players’ AI tuning
priorities). The exit was found most of the time (above 80% of
the time in most levels), but two levels were noteworthy. After
training, in level RL4 the agent could reach the exit 44% of the
time, indicating that the agent found it difficult to reach the exit
across all players’ attempts. This level contains the largest number
of hazards from all levels, and a long distance between the statues
and the exit, which indicates that the level design was indeed
more taxing. For level RL9, in contrast, the exit was discovered
by the trained agents in all cases across players. This may be in
part because players who kept playing the game for nine levels so
far were only those dedicated and knowledgeable enough of the
RL parameters to achieve such performance; in RL10 for instance
the trained agent reached the exit 90% of the time, which is also a
high completion rate.
Figure 5 showcases the differences in layout between these
two levels, which seemingly had a strong impact on the behavior
of the agent. For RL4, there are spikes in the direct path
from ArtBot’s starting position to the exit, leading to the low
completion rate. For RL9, there is a clear path from ArtBot’s
starting position to one statue and then the exit, but the other
statue is behind a number of spikes and far from the path to the
exit, leading to the low collection ratio.
It follows that finding the exit in each level is relatively easy
with one exception. On the other hand, the (optional) task of
finding all collectibles in the level before reaching the exit is
more challenging. Indeed, the ratio of collectibles reached in
the best trained agent varied significantly between levels. The
most difficult levels in which to accomplish this task were RL10,
RL6, RL9 with collection ratios of 10, 16, and 21%, respectively.
Interestingly, while RL9 and RL10 were played only by a few
(presumably expert) players who managed high completion rates,
they had some of the lowest collection ratios; this may point to
fatigue from the part of the players regarding the optional task of
finding all collectibles.
The game allows players to stop training, which is useful if
the learning process does not appear to be productive. The data

Frontiers in Education | www.frontiersin.org

5.4. Feedback by Students and Educators
In this section, we analyse the feedback reported by both students
and educators to user surveys after these end-users had a chance
to play the game in dedicated dissemination events (see Section
4.2). In Tables 2, 3, we report results as the mean and standard
deviation from survey results in 5-item Likert scales collected
from 130 students and 35 teachers, respectively. The students
had not been previously exposed to any AI and ML concepts
in their classes. Most of the teachers were teaching language or
were primary education teachers. Only 10 of the 35 teachers were
specialized in fields such as informatics, robotics, technology, and
coding.The teachers and students who responded to the survey
had no prior involvement with the game; they had not used the
game before or taught concepts related to AI and ML.
It seems that the reception of the game was generally positive
by students and educators. Both groups found it relatively easy to
understand how to play the game, and reported that they would
play it again. Students were slightly more reserved regarding
whether they would recommend ArtBot to their friends, while
many teachers would recommend it to colleagues for use in the
classroom. The responses on how fun the game was were fairly
positive from all participants.
The learning aspects of the game were also positively received;
all respondents reported that it helped them understand more
about AI and ML. Teachers were also very positive regarding
whether they believed the game would help students understand
the concept of AI. The attitudes toward the implementation of

9

June 2022 | Volume 7 | Article 913530

Zammit et al.

Learn to Machine Learn

FIGURE 5 | Levels RL4 (left) and RL9 (right) form the Reinforcement Learning mini-game were identified to be the difficult for the players to find the exit and to collect
all the treasures, respectively.

of learning content and game, they enjoyed the fact that they
could learn new concepts through a game, that they had to
think, solve problems, and “use their brain”. In 17 cases they
reported that the game was fun and entertaining, in 12 cases that
the graphics and colors were among the positive aspects of the
game, and in 4 cases, that they found the game creative. In 15
cases, students reported that they enjoyed their active role, the
complexity, and the fact that they had control over the training
of the AI agent. Unexpectedly, in 8 cases the learners reported
playing with friends as a positive aspect of the game. Since the
game is not designed for multiple players, we assume that they
referred to the context of playing the game in the same location as
their friends; this substantiates the role of the social environment
as a motivation for play for young learners (Ferguson and Olson,
2013).
Most of the positive elements of the game reported by
teachers were relevant to the learning aspect of ArtBot and
its potential to teach students AI and ML concepts and
processes through a playful environment (13 cases). The
interface, the ease of use, the graphics, and the friendly
environment were also among the most cited positive aspects
of the game by the teachers (11 cases). Teachers reported
that the game environment would attract students and
especially students who are already interested in games.
Other positive aspects described by the teachers was the
explanatory information, the avatar selection, the archaeology
aspect, and the fact that the students are manipulating
an AI agent.
The most cited negative aspect of the game by students was
its pacing; in 9 cases the students described the game as slow,
monotonous, time consuming, or boring while in 6 cases, they

TABLE 2 | Likert scale questions asked to the students in the survey. Scores
ranged from 1 (strongly disagree) to 5 (strongly agree).
Question to students

Mean

SD

Pos. (%)

Neg. (%)

It was easy to understand how to play the
game ArtBot.

4.2

0.8

88

4

It was easy to play the game.

4.2

0.9

79

3

I would play the ArtBot game again.

3.9

1.1

66

9

I thought the ArtBot game was boring.

2.2

1.1

11

64

I would recommend to my friends to play
the game ArtBot.

3.5

1.1

58

18

I could learn how to play the game easily.

4.3

0.9

83

5

I thought the ArtBot game was fun.

4.0

1.1

76

9

The ArtBot game helped me understand
how Artificial Intelligence works.

4.0

1.0

75

5

In the game, it was easy to understand
what machine learning is.

4.0

1.0

75

5

I would like to use the ArtBot game at
school.

4.1

1.1

69

9

I would recommend to my teacher to use
the ArtBot game in the classroom so as to
learn more about Artificial intelligence.

3.7

1.4

68

22

The mean, standard deviation (SD), and the percentage of positive (>3) and negative (<3)
replies of the collected values are reported.

the game in the school environment were again positive; students
and teachers reported that they would like to use the game in
the classroom and, for the teachers, that they intended to use the
game in their teaching.
In freeform responses by respondents, one of the most positive
aspects cited by students (20 cases) was the learning aspect of
the game. Students reported that they enjoyed the combination

Frontiers in Education | www.frontiersin.org

10

June 2022 | Volume 7 | Article 913530

Zammit et al.

Learn to Machine Learn

The data indicates that a substantial amount of players
meaningfully engaged with both mini-games of ArtBot. Players
explored the parameters of the algorithms and were interested to
see how manipulating these parameters would vary the outcome
of machine learning. The game is therefore successful in its
objectives to impart information and awareness about the basics
of SL and RL algorithms, their related terminology and processes.
However, the lack of interaction with the information screens also
shows that it is not evident to users when additional details about
the game and background algorithms are made available to them.
Based also on feedback by students and teachers in dedicated
dissemination events, more effort is needed to better engage the
players with the background information and learning content.
The manual image labeling in the SL mini game did not appeal
to players, and the outcome of supervised learning does not vary
enough with changes in the settings to hold players’ attention.
In addition, while the first few RL levels were frequently played,
the subsequent ones did not offer enough variety or novelty to
retain player interest. This could hinder our goal to disseminate
the game to a wide audience, and to enhance the learning
process by active participation through game-based learning. To
address this, additional prompts or datasets closer to the learners’
interests could better indicate the role and impact of labeling on
the training of the model and the behavior of the agent in the SL
process. Similarly, the RL levels could be fine-tuned to provide
settings and agent behaviors which are varied and obvious to
the players. Additionally, interaction data have brought to light
specific design issues with individual levels, such as RL4 and
RL9, which require further tuning to align their difficulty to the
intended difficulty progression in the level order.
The game-based learning aspects of ArtBot in formal
education was positively received by both students and teachers.
Both end-users mostly agreed that the implementation of ArtBot
in the classroom for teaching and learning about AI and ML
would motivate and engage the students, and could play a more
active role in their learning. We note that the sample may
be biased, especially for the educators, since the survey was
completed by teachers who chose to participate in the relevant
events; these teachers had, most probably, positive attitudes
toward new tools and new concepts. That said, we can assume
that games—and particularly ArtBot—can be a useful tool for
educators planning to introduce AI education and literacy in
their classroom.

TABLE 3 | Likert scale questions asked to the teachers in the survey. Scores
ranged from 1 (strongly disagree) to 5 (strongly agree).
Question to teachers

Mean

SD

Pos. (%)

Neg. (%)

It was easy to understand how to play
this game.

3.9

0.9

71

3

The game was easy to use.

3.9

0.9

71

3

I would play this game again.

4.0

1.0

74

9

I found the game boring.

2.2

1.2

17

63

I would recommend to my colleagues
to use this game in their classroom.

4.1

1.0

77

6

It was easy to learn how to play this
game.

3.9

1.0

74

9

I thought the game was fun.

3.8

0.8

74

6

The game helped me understand
how Artificial Intelligence works.

4.2

1.0

83

6

It was easy to understand what
machine learning is, through this
game.

4.2

0.9

86

6

I would like to use this game in the
classroom.

4.1

1.0

77

9

I would like to use this game in my
teaching in the future.

4.2

0.8

80

3

I believe that this game will help
children understand the concept of
Artificial intelligence.

4.3

0.7

89

0

The mean, standard deviation (SD), and the percentage of positive (>3) and negative (<3)
replies of the collected values are reported.

thought the game was too complex or too difficult to understand
and therefore they needed more guidance. In 3 cases the learners
reported that they would like to see more levels or more difficult
challenges customized to the learners’ age. The graphics, the
colors, and the avatar were described as negative aspects in 6
cases. The complexity and the difficulty to understand concepts
of AI (e.g., the “use experience” parameter) was also highlighted
by teachers as a negative aspect (in 7 cases). Teachers reported
that more guidelines and tutorials are needed for explaining the
process, variables, and concepts to the students. Teachers also
listed the quality of the graphics and sound as negative aspects
in 3 cases, and in 2 cases teachers suggested that the game should
have more variables for the students to manipulate.
The attitudes of teachers and students were generally positive,
although there seem to still be some challenges regarding the
complexity of the content and the difficulty to address students
and teachers of varying levels of AI expertise (see also Zammit
et al., 2021).

6.1. Limitations
In this paper, we explored how anonymous usage data and
surveys targeting educators and students can be used to gauge
how a game designed for imparting AI and ML concepts was
perceived by a broad audience. As such, our findings are specific
to the game ArtBot and certainly not generalisable to all games
on AI and ML. However, this paper aims to provide insights
on the design and analytics of games aiming to teach AI and
ML concepts to young students, and to highlight the potential
of games to teach AI and ML.
On that note, ArtBot is intended to be used by teachers and
students in a classroom. Since the data collection process is
anonymous, no information about the players’ ages or their roles

6. DISCUSSION
The analysis of the data collected has consistently shown a
number of important findings regarding the learning and player
behavior of the users. The browser platform is evidently very
convenient for casual players, as this was by far the most popular
for this game. This finding matches our intent to make ArtBot as
accessible as possible to a wide audience.

Frontiers in Education | www.frontiersin.org

11

June 2022 | Volume 7 | Article 913530

Zammit et al.

Learn to Machine Learn

is available. This gives limited context in which to evaluate the
interactions with the game. For example, it would have been
interesting to understand which age groups were playing the later
levels, and which types of end-users (teachers vs. students) were
accessing the additional information.
During the design process of ArtBot, we strove to appeal to
a broad age group by using simple graphics, familiar controls,
and gameplay that has an immediate reward but can be explored
deeper in accordance to the curiosity and understanding of
the player. Our objective was a game that is understandable
enough for primary school students, yet one that can still offer
a challenge to secondary level ones. This versatility comes at the
cost that ArtBot can not fully address the distinct pedagogical
requirements of one specific group over the other. The game
therefore trades off a more targeted teaching approach for a
wider reach. This was corroborated by responses from educators
in our surveys, as teachers of different topics and at different
educational institutions and levels gave very different directions
toward improvement of the game.
The browser platform, despite the advantages of neither
requiring any installation nor a specific device, posed significant
problems in the analysis. Users and sessions cannot be clearly
distinguished, especially if users close or reopen their browsers,
use different browsers, or even multiple tabs. Furthermore, it
is very easy for users to switch to different tabs and leave
the game running in the background, returning to it and
continuing later. This behavior hinders the analysis due to the
misleading timestamps corresponding to the same user and
session. Moreover, the number of unique users is likely inflated
due to the above behavior and/or the use of incognito windows
and cookie blockers.
Regarding the attainment of the learning objectives and
understanding of the AI and ML concepts addressed in the
game, both teachers and students reported a positive impact in
dedicated feedback sessions. However, further tests that combine
quantitative (e.g., pre- and post-tests) and qualitative (e.g.,
interviews) analysis are needed to more objectively examine
the learning impact of the game and identifying potential
misconceptions.

the learning experience with ArtBot11 . This material can be
further developed to address some of the shortcomings identified,
namely additional information about the underlying algorithms
and their use in different real-world applications. The feedback
of both teachers and students reported in Section 5.4 will be an
important guide toward improving the educational material to
mitigate some of the difficulties in understanding the underlying
algorithms and to better connect it to everyday ML uses in
students’ lives.

6.2. Future Work

DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT

7. CONCLUSION
ArtBot is part of the toolkit developed through the LearnML
project to support experimentation, reflection, and critical
thinking about AI and ML to primary and secondary school
students. Its goal was to teach the basics of supervised learning
and reinforcement learning through a playful and exploratory
experience. This paper analyzed how ArtBot has been used by
different players since its launch in April of 2021, including the
feedback of teachers and students in dedicated playtesting events.
Through anonymously collected usage metrics, we identify the
usability of the game, its user interface, and design effectiveness.
The data revealed that the game was generally well received,
having over 2,000 unique users, with the browser version being
the most popular platform. This indicates that our efforts to
make the game easily accessible were fruitful. The players were
largely successful completing the in-game activities; many players
explored the various ML parameter setups, but only a few
explored additional information to learn more about the topics
of ML. The dedicated feedback by students and teachers also
indicated a generally positive outlook on the use of ArtBot in
the classroom, but also raised concerns regarding the game’s
pacing and the complexity of some of the concepts introduced. A
number of potential areas of improvement were identified, both
in broad scope as well as specific design tweaks for each portion
of the game. With these findings in hand, the game can be refined
to enhance player engagement, and to maximize the benefits of a
game-based learning experience in the classroom.

The analysis reported in Section 5 clearly outlined areas where
the game can be improved. The SL mini-game can be reformatted
to give more weight to user settings, by perhaps introducing
different parameters of the algorithm which have a more drastic
effect on the learning process, and thereby relying less on image
labeling. The RL levels require additional features and a gradual
increase in difficulty, with perhaps a better reward system for
players, such as a points system with a leader board showing best
results, or a list of achievements for the player to accomplish.
The additional information button can be highlighted whenever
it is populated with new information, or it could be shown
automatically the first time that new information is available to
the players, in the fashion of a game tutorial. In the latter case,
the text would be revised and made less verbose.
Externally to the game, teaching resources and accompanying
materials have been developed as classroom aids to enhance

Frontiers in Education | www.frontiersin.org

The datasets presented in this article are not readily available
because the data has been collected anonymously but pertains
to the users who have played the game. Although specific users
cannot be identified from the data, we do not wish for the data to
be publicly accessible. Requests to access the datasets should be
directed to MZ, marvin.zammit@um.edu.mt.

ETHICS STATEMENT
Ethical review and approval was not required for the
study on human participants in accordance with the
local legislation and institutional requirements. Written
informed consent from the participants’ legal guardian/next
11 The LearnML Guidebook is freely available at http://art-bot.net/teachers/.

12

June 2022 | Volume 7 | Article 913530

Zammit et al.

Learn to Machine Learn

FUNDING

of kin was not required to participate in this study in
accordance with the national legislation and the institutional
requirements.

This work was supported by the Learn to Machine Learn
(LearnML) project, under the Erasmus+ Strategic Partnership
program (Project Number: 2019-1-MT01-KA201-051220).

AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

MZ and IV carried out the data collection and analysis reported
in the paper. MZ, IV, and AL each contributed to the writing
in the various sections of the paper. AL and GY advised on the
research direction and the text, and oversaw the implementation,
analysis, and authoring process. All authors contributed to the
article and approved the submitted version.

The authors would like to thank the many anonymous users
of ArtBot, as well as all partners of the LearnML project for
their feedback throughout the project and their participation in
dissemination events for promoting ArtBot to the general public.

REFERENCES

Tsai, Y.-L., and Tsai, C.-C. (2020). A meta-analysis of research on digital
game-based science learning. J. Comput. Assist. Learn. 36, 280–294.
doi: 10.1111/jcal.12430
Turchi, T., Fogli, D., and Malizia, A. (2019). Fostering computational thinking
through collaborative game-based learning. Multimedia Tools Appl. 78,
13649–13673. doi: 10.1007/s11042-019-7229-9
Vartiainen, H., Toivonen, T., Jormanainen, I., Kahila, J., Tedre, M., and Valtonen,
T. (2021). Machine learning for middle schoolers: learning through data-driven
design. Int. J. Child Comput. Interact. 29. doi: 10.1016/j.ijcci.2021.100281
Voulgari, I. (2020). “Digital games for science learning and scientific literacy,” in
Non-Formal and Informal Science Learning in the ICT Era, ed M. Giannakos
(Cham: Springer Nature), 35–49. doi: 10.1007/978-981-15-6747-6_3
Voulgari, I., Zammit, M., Stouraitis, E., Liapis, A., and Yannakakis, G.
N. (2021). “Learn to machine learn: designing a game based approach
for teaching machine learning to primary and secondary education
students,” in Proceedings of the ACM Interaction Design and Children
Conference (New York, NY: Association for Computing Machinery), 593–598.
doi: 10.1145/3459990.3465176
Watkins, C. J. C. H., and Dayan, P. (1992). Q-learning. Mach. Learn. 8, 279–292.
doi: 10.1023/A:1022676722315
Yannakakis, G. N., and Togelius, J. (2018). Artificial Intelligence and Games.
(Cham: Springer). doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-63519-4
Zammit, M., Voulgari, I., Liapis, A., and Yannakakis, G. N. (2021). “The road
to AI literacy education: from pedagogical needs to tangible game design,” in
Proceedings of the European Conference on Games Based Learning (Reading:
Academic Conferences International Limited), 763–771.
Zhou, Z., and Liu, S. (2021). Machine Learning. Cham: Springer.
doi: 10.1007/978-981-15-1967-3
Zimmermann-Niefield, A., Turner, M., Murphy, B., Kane, S. K., and Shapiro, R. B.
(2019). “Youth learning machine learning through building models of athletic
moves,” in Proceedings of the ACM International Conference on Interaction
Design and Children (Reading: Academic Conferences International Limited),
121–132. doi: 10.1145/3311927.3323139

Clark, D., Nelson, B., Sengupta, P., and D’Angelo, C. (2009). “Rethinking
science learning through digital games and simulations: genres, examples,
and evidence,” in Proceedings of the Workshop on Learning Science: Computer
Games, simulations, and Education (Washington, DC).
Clarke, D., and Noriega, L. (2003). “Games design for the teaching of artificial
intelligence,” in Interactive Convergence: Research in Multimedia (Prague).
Druga, S., Williams, R., Breazeal, C., and Resnick, M. (2017). ““Hey Google is it ok
if I eat you?” Initial explorations in child-agent interaction,” in Proceedings of
the Conference on Interaction Design and Children (New York, NY), 595–600.
doi: 10.1145/3078072.3084330
Ferguson, C. J., and Olson, C. K. (2013). Friends, fun, frustration and
fantasy: Child motivations for video game play. Motivat. Emot. 37, 154–164.
doi: 10.1007/s11031-012-9284-7
Giannakos, M., Voulgari, I., Papavlasopoulou, S., Papamitsiou, Z., and
Yannakakis, G. (2020). “Games for artificial intelligence and machine
learning education: review and perspectives,” in Non-Formal and Informal
Science Learning in the ICT Era, ed M. Giannakos (Cham: Springer), 117–133.
doi: 10.1007/978-981-15-6747-6_7
Glaser, M., Garsoffky, B., and Schwan, S. (2009). Narrative-based
learning: possible benefits and problems. Communications 34, 429–447.
doi: 10.1515/COMM.2009.026
Hainey, T., Connolly, T. M., Boyle, E. A., Wilson, A., and Razak,
A. (2016). A systematic literature review of games-based learning
empirical evidence in primary education. Comput. Educ. 102, 202–223.
doi: 10.1016/j.compedu.2016.09.001
Hartness, K. (2004). Robocode: using games to teach artificial intelligence. J.
Comput. Sci. Coll. 19, 287–291. doi: 10.5555/1050231.1050275
Kafai, Y. B., and Burke, Q. (2015). Constructionist gaming: understanding
the benefits of making games for learning. Educ. Psychol. 50, 313–334.
doi: 10.1080/00461520.2015.1124022
Lai, E. R. (2011). Critical thinking: a literature review. Pearsons Res. Rep. 6, 40–41.
Mertala, P. (2019). Young children’s conceptions of computers,
code, and the Internet. Int. J. Child Comput. Interact. 19, 56–66.
doi: 10.1016/j.ijcci.2018.11.003
Parker, J., and Becker, K. (2014). “ViPER: Game that teaches machine learning
concepts - a postmortem,” in Proceedings of the IEEE Games and Entertainment
Media Conference (Toronto, ON).
Quinlan, J. (1992). C4.5: Programs for Machine Learning. San Mateo, CA: Morgan
Kaufmann.
Rahwan, I., Cebrian, M., Obradovich, N., Bongard, J., Bonnefon, J.-F.,
Breazeal, C., et al. (2019). Machine behaviour. Nature 568, 477–486.
doi: 10.1038/s41586-019-1138-y
Sutton, R. S., and Barto, A. G. (2018). Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction.
Cambridge, MA; London: MIT Press.
Toivonen, T., Jormanainen, I., Kahila, J., Tedre, M., Valtonen, T., and
Vartiainen, H. (2020). “Co-designing machine learning apps in K-12
with primary school children,” in Proceedings of the IEEE International
Conference on Advanced Learning Technologies (Los Alamitos, CA), 308–310.
doi: 10.1109/ICALT49669.2020.00099

Frontiers in Education | www.frontiersin.org

Conflict of Interest: The authors declare that the research was conducted in the
absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a
potential conflict of interest.
Publisher’s Note: All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the authors
and do not necessarily represent those of their affiliated organizations, or those of
the publisher, the editors and the reviewers. Any product that may be evaluated in
this article, or claim that may be made by its manufacturer, is not guaranteed or
endorsed by the publisher.
Copyright © 2022 Zammit, Voulgari, Liapis and Yannakakis. This is an open-access
article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC
BY). The use, distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided
the original author(s) and the copyright owner(s) are credited and that the original
publication in this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice.
No use, distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these
terms.

13

June 2022 | Volume 7 | Article 913530

